Otherthanthefinancialbodiesmentionedabove, FMCalsoplaysamajorrole.
It is the chief regulator of the commodity(MCX, NCDEX, NMCE, UCX etc) of the Indian futures market.
As per the latest news feed, it has regulated the amount of Rs. 17 trillion, under the commodity trades.
Headquarteris located inMumbai, andthe financial regulatory agency isworking incollaboration with the
Finance Ministry. The chairman of FMC works together with the Members of the same organization to
meet the required ends.The mainaim of this body is toadvise the Central Government on matters of the
ForwardsContractsAct,1952.
IRDA–InsuranceRegulatoryandDevelopmentAuthority:
Lastly, it is better to mention the name of IRDA or insurance regulatory and
Development authority, as a major part of the financial body. This company is going to regulate the apex
statutory body, which will regulate and at the same time, develop the insurance industry. It comprised of
the Indian Parliamentary act and was passed duly by the Indian Government. Headquarter of this group
is in Hyderabad, and it was shifted from Delhi to Hyderabad. These aresome of the best-possible points,
whichyoucantryandfocusat,whiledealingwithfinancialbodiesofIndia.
The Reserve Bank of India issued new guidance in April 2011 for banks to mitigate the risks of use of
information technology in banking operations. RBI guidelines are result of the Working Group's
recommendations on information security, electronic banking, technology risk management and cyber
fraud. The Working Group was formed under the chairmanship of G. Gopalakrishna, the executive
directorofRBIinApril2010.
Theguidanceislargelydrivenbytheneedformitigatingcyberthreatsemergingfromincreasingadoption
ofITbycommercialbanksinIndia.
Recommendationsaremadeinninebroadareas,including-
1. IT Governance: emphasizes the IT risk management accountability on a bank's board of
directors and executive management. Focus includes creating an organizational structure and process to
ensurethatabank'sITsecuritysustainsandextendsbusinessstrategiesandobjectives.
  72
 
2. Information Security: maintaining a framework to guide the development of a comprehensive
information security program, which includes forming a separate information security function to
focus exclusively on information security and risk management, distinct from the activities of an
information technology department. These guidelines specify that the chief information security
officer needs to report directly to the head of risk management and should not have a direct
reportingrelationshipwiththechiefinformationofficer.
3. IT Operations: specialized organizational capabilities that provide value to customers, including
IT service management, infrastructure management, application lifecycle management and IT
operationsriskframework.
4. ITServicesOutsourcing:placestheultimateresponsibilityforoutsourcingoperationsand
managementofinherentriskinsuchrelationshipsontheboardandseniormanagement.Focus
includeseffectiveselectionofserviceprovider,monitoringandcontrolofoutsourcedactivities
andriskevaluationandmanagement.
5. Information Security Audit: the need for banks to re-assess IS audit processes and ensure that
they provide an independent and objective view of the extent to which the risks are managed.
This topic focuses on defining the roles and responsibilities of the IS audit stakeholders and
planningandexecutionoftheaudit.
6. Cyberfraud: defines the need for an industry wide framework on fraud governance with particular
emphasis on tackling electronic channel based frauds. Focus includes creating an organizational
structureforfraudriskmanagementandaspecialcommitteeformonitoringlargevaluefraud.
7. Business Continuity Planning: focuses on policies, standards and procedures to ensure
continuity, resumption and recovery of critical business processes. Also, this topic emphasizes
implementing a framework to minimize the operational, financial, legal, reputational and other
materialconsequencesarisingfromsuchadisaster.
8. CustomerEducation: theneedtoimplement consumerawareness framework andprogramsona
varietyoffraudrelatedissues.
9. Legal Issues: defines the need to put effective processes in place to ensure that legal risks
arising from cyber laws are identified and addressed at banks. It also focuses on board's
consultationwithlegaldepartmentonstepstomitigatebusinessriskswithinthebank.
Background:
Technology has become a part of all walks of life and across all business sectors, and even more so in
banking. There has been massive use of technology across many areas of banking business in India,
both from the asset and the liability side of a bank’s balance sheet. Delivery channels have immensely
increased the choices offered to the customer to conduct transactions with ease and convenience.
Various wholesale and retail payment and settlement systems have enabled faster means of moving the
money to settle funds among banks and customers, facilitating improved turnover of commercial and
financial transactions. Banks have been taking up new projects like data warehousing, customer
relationshipmanagement andfinancialinclusion initiatives tofurther innovate andstrategiseforthefuture
andtowidenthereachofbanking.
The dependence on technology is such that the banking business cannot be thought of in isolation
without technology, such has been the spread of technology footprints across the Indian commercial
banking landscape. Developments in IT have also brought along a whole set of challenges to deal with.
The dependence on technology has led to various challenges and issues like frequent changes or
obsolescence, multiplicity and complexity of systems, different types of controls for different types of
technologies/systems, proper alignment with business objectives and legal/regulatory requirements,
dependence on vendors due to outsourcing of ITservices, vendor related concentration risk, segregation
of duties, external threats leading to cyber frauds/crime, higher impact due to intentional or unintentional
acts of internal employees, new social engineering techniques employed to acquire confidential
  73
 
credentials, need for governance processes to adequately manage technology and information security,
need for appreciation of cyber laws and their impact and to ensure continuity of business processes in
theeventofmajorexigencies.
Technology risks not only have a direct impact on a bank as operational risks but can also exacerbate
other risks like credit risks and market risks. Given the increasing reliance of customers on electronic
delivery channels to conduct transactions, any security related issues have the potential to undermine
public confidence in the use of e-banking channels and lead to reputation risks to the banks. Inadequate
technology implementation can also induce strategic risk in terms of strategic decision making based on
inaccurate data/information. Compliance risk is also an outcome in the event of non-adherence to any
regulatory or legal requirements arising out of the use of IT.These issues ultimately have the potential to
impactthesafetyandsoundnessofabankandinextremecasesmayleadtosystemiccrisis.
Keeping in view the changing threat milieu and the latest international standards, it was felt that there
was a need to enhance RBI guidelines relating to the governance of IT, information security measures to
tacklecyberfraud apart fromenhancingindependent assuranceabout the effectivenessof ITcontrols.To
consider these and related issues, RBI announced the creation of a Working Group on Information
Security, Electronic Banking, Technology Risk Management and Tackling Cyber Fraud inApril, 2010. The
GroupwassetupundertheChairmanshipoftheExecutiveDirectorShri.G.Gopalakrishna.
TheGroupdelvedintovarious issuesarisingout oftheuseof InformationTechnology inbanksandmade
its recommendations in ninebroad areas.These areas areITGovernance, Information Security,ISAudit,
IT Operations, IT Services Outsourcing, Cyber Fraud, Business Continuity Planning, Customer
AwarenessprogrammesandLegalissues.
MajorRecommendationsoftheWorkingGroup
The Group felt that the recommendations are not “one-size-fits-all” and the implementation of these
recommendations need to be based on the nature and scope of activities engaged by banks and the
technology environment prevalent in the bank and the support rendered by technology to the business
processes.
OnITGovernance:
 Banks need to formulate a Board approved IT strategy/plan document. An IT policy needs to be
framed for regular management of IT functions and ensure that detailed documentation in terms of
procedures and guidelines exists and are implemented. The strategic plan and policy need to be
reviewedannually.
 Aneed was felt to create an exclusive Board level IT Strategy Committee with a minimum of two
directors as members, one of whom should be an independent director. All members of the IT Strategy
Committee would need to be technically competent while at least one member would need to have
substantialexpertiseinmanaging/guidingtechnologyinitiatives.
 Aneed was felt for the position of CIO in banks, to be the key business player and play a part in
the executive decision-making function. The key role of the CIO would be to act as an owner of the IT
functionandenablethealignmentofbusinessandtechnology.
 IT Steering Committee needs to be created with representations from various IT functions, HR,
Legal and business functions as appropriate. The role of the IT Steering Committee would be to assist
theExecutiveManagementintheimplementationoftheITstrategyapprovedbytheBoard.
 The IT Steering Committee should assess whether the IT Governance structure fosters
accountability, is effective and transparent, has well defined objectives and actions and unambiguous
responsibilitiesforeachlevelintheorganization.
 The organizational structure for IT should be commensurate with the size, scale and nature of
business activities carried out by the bank and the underlying support provided by information systems
forbusinessfunctions.
  74
 
 Key focus areas of IT Governance that need to be considered include strategic alignment, value
delivery,riskmanagement,resourcemanagementandperformancemanagement.
 Requirements for trained resources with requisite skill sets for the IT function need to be
understood and assessed appropriately. A periodic assessment of the training requirements for human
resources should be made to ensure that sufficient, competent and capable human resources are
available.
 The Board needs to be adequately aware of IT resources and infrastructure available to meet
required strategic business objectives and ensure that a process is in place to record the resources
available/potentiallyavailabletothebank.
 Performance of IT function should be monitored to ensure delivery on time and within budget,
withappropriatefunctionalityandwithintendedbenefits.
 Banks need to establish and maintain an enterprise information model to enable applications
development and decision-supporting activities, consistent with IT strategy. The model should facilitate
optimal creation, use and sharing of information by a business, in a way that it maintains integrity, and is
flexible,functional,cost-effective,timely,secureandresilient tofailure
 There is also a need to maintain an “enterprise data dictionary” that incorporates the
organization’sdatasyntaxrules.Thisshouldenablethesharing of dataamongapplicationsand systems,
promote a common understanding of data among IT and business users and preventing incompatible
dataelementsfrombeingcreated
 Procedures to assess the integration and interoperability of complex IT processes such as
problem, change and configuration management need to exist, depending upon the extent of technology
leverageinabank.
 An appropriate programme and project management framework needs to be implemented for
themanagementofallITprojects,whichensurescorrectprioritizationandco-ordination
 For managing project risks, a consistent and formally defined programme and project
management approach should be applied to IT projects that enable appropriate stakeholder participation
andmonitoringofprojectrisksandprogress
 For major projects, formal project risk assessment needs to be carried out and managed on an
ongoingbasis
 Thebank-wide risk management policy or operational risk policy needs to include ITrelatedrisks
andtheRiskManagementCommitteeshouldperiodicallyreviewandupdatethesame(atleastannually).
 IT function needs to support a robust and comprehensive Management Information System with
respect to various business functions as per business needs and in coordination with business personnel
soastoprovideinputsforeffectivedecisionmakingbymanagement
 Components of well-known IT control frameworks such as COBIT as applicable to each bank’s
technology environment may be considered for implementation in a phased manner providing a
standardizedsetoftermsanddefinitionsthatarecommonlyinterpretedbyallstakeholders.
 Effective IT control practices and their monitoring are required to avoid breakdowns in internal
control and oversight, increase efficiency, use resources optimally and increase the effectiveness of IT
processes.
 Information on major IT projects that have a significant impact on the bank’s risk profile and
strategy needs to be reported to appropriate levels of management and undergo appropriate strategic
andcost/rewardanalysisonaperiodicbasis.
 Project level steering committees needs to be created to take responsibility for execution of the
projectplan,achievementofoutcomesandprojectcompletion.
  75
 
 An IT balanced scorecard may be considered for implementation, with approval from key
stakeholders, to measure IT performance along different dimensions such as financial aspects, customer
satisfaction,processeffectiveness,futurecapability,andforassessingITmanagementperformance.
 Banks may also consider assessing their IT maturity level, based on well known international
standards,designanactionplanandimplementtheplantoreachthetarget maturitylevel.
 AforuminIndia, undertheaegis ofIDRBT,akintotheFinancial ServicesTechnologyConsortium
in the US, can work collaboratively to solve shared problems and challenges, as well as pioneer new
technologiesthatbenefitsallbanks.
 An exclusive forum for CIO and senior IT officials of banks, under the aegis of IDRBT, can be
encouraged to enable sharing of experiences and discuss issues of contemporary relevance for the
benefitoftheindustryasawhole.
OnInformationSecurity:
 The major role of the Board/ Top Management should involve approving information security
policies, establishing necessary organizational processes/ functions for information security and
providingnecessaryresources.
 Each bank needs to create a separate information security function to focus exclusively on
information security management. The organization of the information security function should be
commensurate with the nature and size of activities of a bank and extent of IT leverage and e-delivery
channels. The function should be adequately resourced in terms of the number of staff, their range and
levelofskills,andtoolsortechniques.
 A sufficiently senior level official of the rank of GM/DGM/AGM needs to be designated as the
Chief Information Security Officer (CISO) responsible for articulating and enforcing the policies that a
bank uses to protect its information assets apart from coordinating the information security related issues
/ implementation within the organization as well as relevant external agencies. The CISO needs to report
directly to the Head of the Risk Management function and should not have a direct reporting relationship
withtheCIO.
 ABoardapprovedInformationsecuritypolicy needstobeinplaceandreviewedat least annually.
The policy framework should take into consideration, inter-alia, aspects like :alignment with business
objectives; the objectives, scope, ownership and responsibility for the policy; information security
organizational structure; information security roles and responsibilities; exceptions; knowledge and skill
sets required; periodic training and continuous professional education; compliance review and penal
measuresfornon-complianceofpolicies.
 Risk assessment is the core competence of information security management for a bank. The
risk assessment must, for each asset within its scope, identify the threat/ vulnerability combinations that
have a likelihood of impacting the confidentiality, availability or integrity of that asset - from a business,
complianceand/orcontractualperspective.
 Job descriptions, including roles and responsibilities, employment agreements and policy
awareness acknowledgements from staff increase accountability for security. Management can
communicate general and specific security roles and responsibilities for all employees based on their job
descriptions. Management should expect all employees, officers, and contractors to comply with
information security and/or acceptable-use policies and protect the institution’s assets, including
information.
 Digital evidence needs to be considered as similar to any other form of legal proof. It needs to
withstand challenges to its integrity, its handling must be carefully tracked and documented, and it must
besuitablyauthenticatedbytheconcernedpersonnel.Apolicyneedstobeinplaceinthisregard.
 Maintaining detailed inventory of information assets and classification of information/data are
amongthekeycomponentsofinformationsecuritymanagement.
  76
 
 Banks need to grant authorisation for access to information assets only where a valid business
needexistsandonlyforadefinitetimeperiodforwhichtheaccessisrequired.
 Personnelwithelevatedsystemaccessprivilegesshouldbecloselysupervised.
 Informationsecurityneedstobeconsideredat allstages of aninformationasset’s(likehardware,
software) life-cycle which typically includes: planning and design; acquisition and implementation;
maintenanceandsupport;anddisposalsoastominimiseexposuretovulnerabilities.
 Banks should have a process in place to verifyjob application information on all new employees.
Thesensitivityofaparticularjoboraccesslevelmaywarrantadditionalbackgroundandcreditchecks.
 Banks should implement suitable physical and environment controls taking into consideration
threats, and based on the entity’s unique geographical location, building configuration, neighboring
entities,etc.
 There is a vital need for initial, and ongoing, training/awareness programmes on information
security for employees and vendor personnel. There should also be a mechanism to track the
effectiveness of the training programmes periodically through an assessment process designed for
testingtheunderstandingofrelevantpolicies.
 Arobust incident management process needs tobe in placetomaintain the capability to manage
incidents within an enterprise, to enable containment of exposures and to achieve recovery within a
specified timeperiod. Incidents could include aspects relating to misuseof computing assets, information
disclosureoreventsthatthreatenthecontinuanceofbusinessprocesses.
 Abank needs to have clear accountability mechanisms and communication plans (for escalation
and reporting to the Board and senior management and customer communication where appropriate) to
limit the impact of information security incidents. Institutions would also need to pro-actively notify CERT-
In/IDRBT/RBIregardingmajorcybersecurityincidents.
 There should be documented standards/procedures for administering an application system,
which are approved by the application owner and kept up-to-date. Access to the application should be
based on the principle of least privilege and “need to know” commensurate with the job responsibilities.
Adequatesegregationofdutiesneedstobeenforced.
 Every application affecting critical/sensitive information, for eg. impacting financial, customer,
control, risk management, regulatory and statutory aspects, must provide for detailed audit trails/ logging
capability with details like transaction id, date, time, originator id , authorizer id, actions undertaken by a
given userid, etc. Other details likelogging IPaddress of client machine, terminal identityor location also
need to be available.Alerts regarding use of the same machine for both maker and checker transactions
need to be considered. The logs/alerts/exception reports with regard to systems should be analyzed and
anyissuesneedtoberemediedattheearliest.
 The audit trails should satisfy a bank’s business requirements apart from regulatory and legal
requirements. It should also be facilitating the conduct of audit, serving as forensic evidence when
required and assisting in dispute resolution including for non-repudiation purposes.Audit trails should be
securedtoensuretheintegrityoftheinformationcapturedandpreservationofevidence.
 Banks may obtain application integrity statements in writing from the application system vendors
providing for reasonable level of assurance about the application being free of malware at the time of
sale, free of any obvious bugs, and free of any covert channels in the code (of the version of the
applicationbeingdeliveredaswellasanysubsequentversions/modificationsdone).
 Data security measures need to be in place. Banks need to define and implement procedures to
ensure the integrity and consistency of all critical data stored in electronic form, such as databases, data
warehousesanddataarchives.
 Direct back-end updates to database should not be allowed except during exigencies, in the
eventofagenuinebusinessneed andafterdueauthorizationasperrelevantpolicy
  77
 
 Any changes to an application system/data need to be justified by genuine business need and
approvalssupportedbydocumentationandsubjectedtoarobustchangemanagementprocess.
 For all critical applications, either source code must be received from the vendor or a software
escrow agreement needs to be in place with a third party to ensure source code availability in case the
vendor goes out of business. It needs to be ensured that product updates and programme fixes are also
includedintheescrowagreement.
 Data transfer from one process to another or from one application to another, particularly in
respect of critical or financial applications, should not have any manual intervention in order to prevent
any unauthorized modification. The process needs to be automated and properly integrated through
“Straight Through Processing” methodology with an appropriate authentication mechanism and audit
trails.
 In the event of data pertaining to Indian operations being stored and/or processed abroad, for
example, by foreign banks, there needs to be suitable controls like segregation of data and strict access
controls based on ‘need to know’ and robust change controls. The bank should be in a position to
adequately prove the same to the regulator. Regulator’s access to such data/records and other relevant
information should not be impeded inany manner andRBI wouldhavethe right tocausean inspection to
be made of the processing centre/data centre and its books and accounts by one or more of its officers
oremployeesorotherpersons.
 Robustsystemsecuritytestingneedstobecarriedout.
 Multi-tier application architecture needs to be implemented for critical e-banking systems like
internet banking which differentiate session control, presentation logic, server side input validation,
businesslogicanddatabaseaccess.
 A bank needs to have a documented migration policy specifying a systematic process for data
migration and for ensuring data integrity, completeness and consistency. Explicit sign offs from
users/application owners need to be obtained after each stage of migration and also after the migration
processhas beencompleted.Audit trailsneedto beavailabletodocument theconversion, includingdata
mappingsandtransformations.
 Banks need to carry out due diligence with regard to new technologies/systems since they can
potentiallyintroduceadditionalriskexposures
 Any new business products introduced, along with the underlying information systems, need to
be assessed as part of a formal product approval process which incorporates, inter-alia, security related
aspectsandfulfilmentofrelevantlegalandregulatoryprescriptions.
 Cryptographic techniques need to be used to control access to critical and sensitive
data/information in transit and storage. Banks should only select encryption algorithms which are well
established international standards and which have been subjected to rigorous scrutiny by an
international community of cryptographers or approved by authoritative professional bodies, reputable
securityvendorsorgovernmentagencies.
 Normally, a minimum of 128-bit SSL encryption is expected. Constant advances in computer
hardware, cryptanalysis and distributed brute force techniques may induce use of larger key lengths
periodically. It is expected that banks will properly evaluate security requirements associated with their
internet banking systems and other relevant systems and adopt an encryption solution that is
commensuratewiththedegreeofconfidentialityandintegrityrequired.
 Banks need to scan frequently for vulnerabilities and address discovered flaws proactively to
avoid the likelihood of having their computer systems compromised. Automated vulnerability scanning
toolsneedtobeusedagainstallsystemsintheirnetworksonaperiodicbasis.
 Banks need to have monitoring processes in place to identify suspicious events and unusual
behavioural patterns that could impact the security of IT assets. The strength of the monitoring controls
should be based on the criticality of an IT asset. A bank would need to establish a clear allocation of
  78
 
responsibility for regular monitoring mechanism, and the tools and processes in this regard need to be
commensuratewiththelevelofmonitoringrequired.
 Critical functions , for example relating to financial, regulatory and legal, MIS and risk
management, need to be done through proper application systems and not manually or in a semi-
automated manner through spreadsheets which pose risks relating to data integrity and reliability. Use of
spreadsheets in this regard should be restricted and should be replaced by appropriate ITapplications in
aphasedmannerwithinadefinitetimeframe.
 Arobust process needs to be in place for “effective malware control”. Typical controls to protect
against malicious code use layered combinations of technology, policies and procedures and training.
Thecontrolsareofthepreventiveanddetective/correctiveinnature.
 Establishing a robust network protection strategy and layered security based on the principle of
defence-in-depthisanabsolutenecessityforbanks.
 There should be arrangements for monitoring and reporting of the information security condition
of the organization, which are documented, agreed with top management and performed regularly.
Securityrelatedmetricscanbeusedtomeasuresecuritypolicyimplementation.
 Given the multiplicity of devices and systems, banks should deploy suitable automated tools for
logaggregationandconsolidationfrommultiplemachines/systemsandforlogcorrelationandanalysis.
 Security andAudit Processes of Critical service providers/vendors need to be assessed regularly
sinceineffectivethird-partycontrolscanweakentheabilityofabanktoachieveitscontrolobjectives.
 Commercial banks should implement ISO 27001 based Information Security Management
System (ISMS) best practices for their critical functions. Additionally, other reputed security/IT control
frameworksmayalsobeconsideredbybanks.
 Strong controls need to be initiated against any remote access facility. The management should
establish policies restricting remote access and be aware of all remote-access devices attached to the
bank’ssystems.Thesedevicesshouldbestrictlycontrolled.
 Events that trigger the implementation of a business continuity plan may have security
implications. Risk assessments should consider the changing risks that appear in business continuity
scenariosanddifferentsecurityposturesthat mayneedtobeestablished.
 Information security assurance needs to be obtained through periodic penetration testing
exercises, audits and vulnerability assessments. The assurance work needs to be performed by
appropriately trained and independent information security experts/auditors. The strengths and
weaknesses of critical internet-based applications, other critical systems and networks needs to be
carried out before each initial implementation, and at least annually thereafter.Any findings needs to be
reportedandmonitoredusingasystematicauditremediationorcompliancetrackingmethodology.
 Provision of various electronic banking channels like ATM/debit cards/internet banking/phone
banking should be issued only at the option of the customers based on specific written or authenticated
electronic requisition along with a positive acknowledgement of the terms and conditions from the
customer.Acustomer should not be forced to opt for services in this regard. Banks should provide clear
information to their customers about the risks and benefits of using e-banking delivery services to enable
customerstodecideonchoosingsuchservices.
 In view of the proliferation of cyber attacks and their potential consequences, banks should
implement two-factor authentication for critical activities like fund transfers and changing customer
relateddetailsthroughinternet bankingfacility.
 The implementation of appropriate authentication methodologies should be based on an
assessment of the risk posed by the institution’s internet banking systems. The risk should be evaluated
in light of the type of customer (e.g., retail or corporate/commercial); customer transactional capabilities
(e.g., bill payment, fundtransfer), the sensitivity of customer information being communicated to the bank
andthevolumeoftransactionsinvolved.
  79
 
 While not using the asymmetric cryptosystem and hash function is a source of legal risk, the
banks, at the least, need to implement dynamic two-factor authentication through user id/password
combination and second factor like (a) OTP/dynamic access code through various modes like SMS over
mobile phones or hardware token or (b) a digital signature, through a card/token containing a digital
certificateandassociatedprivatekey(preferablyforcorporatecustomers).
 To enhance online processing security, confirmatory second channel procedures(like telephony,
SMS, email etc.) should be applied with regard to transactions above pre-set values, creation of new
account linkages, registration of third party payee details, changing account details or revision to funds
transfer limits. In devising these security features, the bank should take into account their efficacy and
differingcustomerpreferencesforadditionalonlineprotection.
 Based on mutual authentication protocols, customers could also authenticate the bank’s web site
through security mechanisms such as personal assurance messages/images, exchange of challenge
response security codes and/or the secure sockets layer (SSL) server certificate verification. In recent
times, Extended Validation Secure Sockets Layer (EV-SSL) Certificates are increasingly being used. It
should, however, be noted that SSL does not provide end-to-end encryption security at the application
layerbutisonlydesignedtoencryptdataintransitatthenetworktransport layer.
 Arisk based transaction monitoring or surveillance process needs to be put in place. The banks
may consider dynamic scoring models and related processes to trigger or alert transactions which are
not normal to improve preventive/detective capability. Study of customer transaction behavioral patterns
and stopping irregular transactions or obtaining prior confirmation from customers for outlier transactions
maybeincorporatedaspartoftheprocess.
 Chip based cards house data on microchips instead of magnetic stripes, making data more
difficult to steal and cards more difficult to reproduce. It is recommended that RBI may consider moving
over to chip based cards along with requiring upgradation of necessary infrastructure like ATMs/POS
terminalsinthisregardinaphasedmanner.
 For debit / credit card transactions at the POS terminals, PIN based authorization system needs
to be put in place (without any looping) in place of the existing signature based system and the non-PIN
basedPOSterminalsneedtobewithdrawninaphasedmanner.
 Given that control, security and legal issues on cloud computing are still evolving, a bank needs
to be cautious and carry out due diligence to assess the risks comprehensively before considering cloud
computing.
 There needs to be forum of CISOs who can periodically interact and share experiences
regarding any information security threats. It is reported that a CISO forum is already functional under
IDRBT. The forum may, among other functions, endeavour to share good practices, identify any specific
informationsecurityissuesandflagthemtoappropriatestakeholdersliketheregulator,IBAetc.
 There is a need for a system of information sharing akin to the functions performed by FS-ISAC
(Financial Services Information SharingAgency) in the US. IDRBTas asub-CERTto the banking system
canfunctionasanodalpointforinformationsharing.
 Accreditation and empanelment of security audit qualifications/certifications and security audit
vendors can be considered at a wider level by the Government of India/CERT-In or by IDRBT for the
bankingsector.
 Inordertoreducethetime,cost, andcomplexity ofsoftwareassurance andtoensureitssecurity,
sustainability and resilience and increase the effectiveness of the methods used by the banking industry
for software assurance, an initiative similar to FSTC SoftwareAssurance Initiative (SAI) in the US can be
consideredinIndia,possiblyundertheaegisofIDRBTalongwithvariousstakeholders.
 There is a need for IBA, IDRBT and reputed institutions like DSCI to collaborate and develop
security frameworks and detailed implementation methodologies and procedures for the benefit of the
bankingsector,basedontheinformationsecurityrelatedaspectscoveredinthisreport.
  80
 
 There is an increasing need for specific detailed research in security of banking technology and
bringing out innovative and secure banking products in collaboration with reputed academic bodies like
theIITs. IDRBTcanexpanditsactivities/initiativesinthisregard.
 Given the nature of the problem of cyber security, there needs to beengagement at a wider level
nationally and internationally, with the government, law enforcement agencies, various industrial
associationsandacademicinstitutions.
 RBI can consider having a multi-disciplinary Standing Committee on Information Security with
representation from various stakeholders to consider new security related developments and also legal
developments, and based on the same, provide recommendations for suitable updation of guidelines on
periodicbasis.
 Collaborative efforts may also be made by reputed bodies like IDRBT, IIBF and DSCI
coordinated by IBA to create customized indigenous certification courses to certify specific knowledge
and skillsets in IT/information security areas for various categories of bank personnel at operational and
manageriallevelssoastocreatealargeanddiversepoolofrequisitetalentwithinthebankingsystem.
OnIToperations:
 The Board of Directors and Senior Management should oversee the implementation of a safe
and sound IT operations environment. The policies and procedures defined as part of IT operations
shouldsupportabank’sgoalsandobjectivesaswellasfollowstatutoryandregulatoryrequirements.
 IT operations include business services which are available to the internal or external customers
of the organization using IT as a service delivery component. Instances include Mobile Banking and
Internet Banking. IT Operations also include IT components which are used to support IT Operations,
which can be service desk application, ticketing tools, event management tools etc. Banks may consider
including test environment, quality assurance environment and any other such environment besides
productionenvironmentwithinthescopeofITOperations.
 Banks should analyze their IT operation environment, including technology, human resources
andimplementedprocessestoidentifythreatsandvulnerabilitiesandconductaperiodicriskassessment.
As part of risk identification and assessment, banks should identify events or activities that could disrupt
operations or negatively affect reputation or earnings and assess compliance to regulatory requirements.
Banks should define various attributes for each risk component like probability of occurrence, financial
impact etc. These attributes along with the business process involved should be used to prioritize risk
mitigationactionsandcontrolframework.
 IT Strategy as framework should provide feedback to IT operations on the services to be
supported, their underlying business processes, prioritization of these services etc. A well-defined IT
strategy framework will assist IT operations in supporting IT services as required by the business and
definedinSLAs.
 Service Valuation is the mechanism that can be considered by banks to quantify the services
whichareavailabletoitscustomers (internal/external)andsupportedby IToperations infinancialterms.
Service Valuation will assist the IT Operation Function to showcase the involvement of the function in
supportingthecorebusinessofthebanks.
 Demand Management process provides guidelines which may be used by banks to understand
the business processes IT operations support to identify, analyze and codify Patterns of Business
Activities(PBA)toprovidesufficientbasisforcapacityrequirement.
 The components which should be considered when designing a new IT service or making a
change to the existing IT service include business processes, service level agreements, IT infrastructure,
ITenvironmentetc.
 Over the years, the IT infrastructure in banks has grown and developed, and there may not be a
clear picture of all the ITservices currently being provided, and the consumers for each service. In order
to establish an accurate IT landscape it is recommended that an IT Service Catalogue is defined,
  81
 
produced and maintained. The Service Catalogue can be considered a repository that provides
informationonalltheITservicessupportedbytheITOperationsframework.
 Banks need to institute a Service Level Management process for planning, coordinating, and
drafting, agreeing, monitoring and reporting of service attributes used to measure the quality of
service. The framework needs to include guidelines for ongoing reviews of service achievements to
ensure that the required and cost-justifiable service quality is maintained and gradually improved. The
Service Level Management framework defined by the banks should also have guidelines defined for
loggingandmanagementincludingescalationofcomplaintsandcompliments.
 A Capacity Management process is required to ensure that cost-justifiable IT capacity for IT
services exists and matches the current and future business requirements as identified in the Service
Level Agreement. Banks adopting the capacity management process should ensure that the framework
encompassesallareaspertainingtotechnologyi.e.hardware,software,humanresources,facilitiesetc.
 The availability and reliability of IT services can directly influence customer satisfaction and the
reputation of banks.Availability Management is essential in ensuring IT delivers the right level of service
required by the business to satisfy its business objectives. When defining Availability targets for a
businessservice,banksshouldconsideridentifyingVitalBusinessFunction(VBF).
 Attributes that can be used by banks to report availability of IT services include availability (in
percentage), Mean Time between service incidents, Mean Time between Failures and Mean Time to
Repair.
 Implementation of Service Asset and Configuration Management framework has cost and
resource implications and therefore there need to be strategic discussions about the priorities to be
addressed.
 Banks need to implement a ‘change management’ process for handling any changes in
technology and processes to ensure that the changes are recorded, assessed, authorized, prioritized,
planned,tested,implemented, documentedandreviewedinacontrolledmannerandenvironment.
 Operations phase as part of the Service Management lifecycle is responsible for executing and
performing processes that optimize the cost of the quality of services. As part of the organization, it is
responsible for enabling the business to meets its objectives. As part of technology, it is responsible for
the effective functioning of components that support business services. The various aspects that banks
need to consider include event management, incident management, problem management and access
management.
OnIToutsourcing:
 The Board and senior management are ultimately responsible for outsourced operations and for
managing risks inherent in such outsourcing relationships. Responsibilities for due diligence, oversight
and management of outsourcing and accountability for all outsourcing decisions continue to rest with the
bank,Boardandseniormanagement.
 Banks need to assess the degree of ‘materiality’ inherent in the outsourced functions. Whether
an outsourcing arrangement is ‘material’to the business context or not is a qualitative judgment and may
be determined on the basis of criticality of service, process or technology to the overall business
objectives. Where a Bank relies on third party employees to perform key banking functions such as
applications processing, etc. on a continuous basis, such outsourcing may also be construed as
‘material’,whetherornotthepersonnelarelocatedwithinthepremisesoftheBank.
 Outsourcing of non-financial processes, such as technology operations, is ‘material’ and if
disrupted,hasthepotentialtosignificantlyimpactbusinessoperations,reputationandstabilityofaBank.
 Risk evaluation should be performed prior to entering into an outsourcing agreement and
reviewed periodically in light of known and expected changes, as part of the strategic planning or review
process.
  82
 
 Banks should evaluate vendor managed processes or specific vendor relationships as they
relate to information systems and technology.All outsourced information systems and operations may be
subject to risk management and security and privacy policies that meet a bank’s own standards and any
externalrequirements.
 While negotiating/ renewing an outsourcing arrangement, appropriate diligence should be
performed to assess the capability of the technology service provider to comply with obligations in the
outsourcing agreement. Due diligence should involve an evaluation of all information about the service
providerincludingqualitative,quantitative,financial,operationalandreputationalfactors.
 Banks must be required to report to the regulator where the scale and nature of functions
outsourced are significant, or extensive data sharing is involved across geographic locations as part of
technology/processoutsourcing
 The terms and conditions governing the contract between the bank and the service provider
should be carefully defined in written agreements and vetted by the bank's legal counsel on their legal
effectandenforceability.
 Banks should ensure that the contract brings out the nature of the legal relationship between the
parties (agent, principal or otherwise), and addresses risks and mitigation strategies identified at the risk
evaluation and due diligence stages. Contracts should clearly define the roles and responsibilities of the
parties to the contract and include suitable indemnification clauses. Any ‘limitation of liability’
consideration incorporated by the service provider should be assessed in consultation with the legal
department.
 In the event of multiple service provider relationships where two or more service providers
collaborate to deliver an end to end solution for the financial institution, the bank remains responsible for
understanding and monitoring the control environment of all service providers that have access to the
bank’ssystems,recordsorresources.
 Banks should establish a structure for management and control of outsourcing, based on the
nature,scope,complexityandinherentriskoftheoutsourcedactivity.
 Management should include SLAs in the outsourcing contracts to agree and establish
accountability for performance expectations. SLAs must clearly formalize performance criteria to
measure the quality and quantity of service levels. For outsourced technology operations, specific
metrics may be defined around service availability, business continuity and transaction security, in order
tomeasureservicesrenderedbytheexternalvendororganization.
 Banks should evaluate the adequacy of the internal controls environment offered by the service
provider.Due consideration should be given to implementation by the service provider of various aspects
like information security policies and employee awareness of the same, logical access controls, physical
andenvironmentalsecurityandcontrols,controlsforhandlingdataetc.
 Outsourcing should not impede or interfere with the ability of the bank or the regulator in
performing its supervisory functions and objectives. As a practice, institutions should conduct pre- and
post- outsourcing implementation reviews.An institution should also review its outsourcing arrangements
periodically (atleast annually) to ensure that its outsourcing risk management policies and procedures,
andtheseguidelines,areeffectivelycompliedwith.
 An institution should, at least on an annual basis, review the financial and operational condition
oftheserviceprovidertoassessitsabilitytocontinuetomeetoutsourcingobligations.
 Banks should also periodically commission independent audit and expert assessments on the
securityandcontrolenvironmentoftheserviceprovider.
 Banks should ensure that their business continuity preparedness is not compromised on account
ofoutsourcing.
 Banks need to takeeffective steps to ensure that risks with respect to confidentiality and security
ofdataareadequatelymitigated.
  83
 
 In the event of outsourcing of technology operations, the banks should subject the same to
enhanced and rigorous change management and monitoring controls since ultimate responsibility and
accountabilityrestswiththebank.
 Banks, while framing the viable contingency plan, need to consider the availability of alternative
service providers or the possibility of bringing the outsourced activity back-in-house in an emergency (for
example, where number of vendors for a particular service is extremely limited) and the costs, time and
resourcesthatwouldbeinvolvedandbepreparedtotakequickaction,ifwarranted.
 The engagement of service providers across multiple geographies exposes the organization to
country risk – economic, social and political reasons in the country that may adversely affect the bank’s
business and operations. Banks should proactively evaluate such risk as part of the due diligence
processanddevelopappropriatemitigatingcontrolsandasrequired,aneffectiveexitstrategy.
 Emerging technologies such as data center hosting, applications as a service and cloud
computing have given rise to unique legal jurisdictions for data and cross border regulations. Banks
should clarify the jurisdiction for their data and applicable regulations at the outset of an outsourcing
arrangement. This information should be reviewed periodically and in case of significant changes
performedbytheserviceprovider.
 Banks should ensure that quality and availability of banking services to customers are not
adversely affecteddue to the outsourcing arrangements enteredintoby the bank.Banks needto institute
a robust grievance redressal mechanism, which should not be compromised in any way due to
outsourcing.
 IBA may facilitate requisite data sharing between banks to maintain scoring information for
existing / new service providers which may include any fraud or major operational lapses committed by
theserviceproviders.
 Detailed service provider assessment and monitoring frameworks and best practices from a
bankingcontextcanbeexploredbyIBAincollaborationwithinstitutionslikeDSCIandIDRBT.
OnISAudit:
 To meet the responsibility to provide an independent audit function with sufficient resources to
ensure adequate IT coverage, the board of directors or its audit committee should provide an internal
auditfunctionwhichiscapableofevaluatingITcontrolsadequately.
 Banks should enable an adequately skilled composition of the Audit Committee to manage the
complexity of the ISAudit oversight.Adesignated member of theAudit Committee needs to possess the
relevant knowledge of Information Systems, IS Controls and audit issues. The designated member
should also have relevant competencies to understand the ultimate impact of deficiencies identified in IT
Internal Control framework by the IS Audit function. The Board or its Audit Committee members should
seektrainingtofillanygapsintheknowledgerelatedtoITrisksandcontrols.
 TheAudit Committee should devote appropriate and sufficient time to IS audit findings identified
during IS Audits and members of the Audit Committee would need to review critical issues highlighted
andprovideappropriateguidancetothebank’smanagement.
 Banks should have a separate ISAudit function within the InternalAudit department led by an IS
Audit Head, assuming responsibility and accountability of the IS audit function, reporting to the Chief
Audit Executive (CAE) or Head of InternalAudit. Where the bank uses external resources for conducting
IS audit in areas where skills are lacking within the bank, the responsibility and accountability for such
externalISauditsstillremainwiththeISAuditHeadandCAE.
 IS Auditors should act independently of the bank's management. In all matters related to the
audit, the IS Audit should be independent of the auditee in both attitude and appearance. IS Auditors
should be professionally competent, having the skills, knowledge, training and relevant experience to
conduct an audit. IS Auditors should exercise due professional care, which includes following
professionalauditingstandardsinconductingtheaudit.
  84
 
 Banks may decide to outsource the execution of segments of the audit plan to external
professional service providers, as per the overall audit strategy decided in co-ordination with the CAE
and theAudit Committee. The work outsourced shall be restricted to execution of audits identified in the
audit plan. Banks need to ensure that the overall ownership and responsibility of the IS Audit including
the audit planning process, risk assessment and follow up of compliance remains within the Bank.
External assistance may be obtained initially to put in place necessary processes in this regard, if
required.
 An Audit Charter / Audit Policy is a document which guides and directs the activities of the
Internal Audit function. IS Audit, being an integral part of the Internal Audit function, should also be
governed by the sameAudit Charter / Audit Policy. The audit policy should be documented to contain a
clear description of its mandate, purpose, authority and accountability (of relevant members/officials in
respect of the IS Audit i.e. IS Auditors, audit management and the audit committee) and the relevant
operatingprinciples.ThedocumentshouldbeapprovedbytheBoardofDirectors.
 ISAudit policy/charter should be subjected to an annual review to ensure its continued relevance
andeffectiveness.
 The IS auditor should consider establishing a quality assurance process (e.g., interviews,
customer satisfaction surveys, assignment performance surveys etc.) to understand the auditee’s needs
and expectations relevant to the IS audit function. These needs should be evaluated against the policy
withaviewtoimprovingtheserviceorchangingtheservicedeliveryorauditcharter,asnecessary.
 Banks need to carry out IS Audit planning using the Risk Based Audit Approach. The approach
involves aspects like IT risk assessment methodology, defining the IS Audit Universe, scoping and
planningtheaudit,executionandfollowupactivities.
 The IS Audit Universe can be built around the four types of IT resources and various IT
processes like application systems, information or data, infrastructure(technology and facilities
like hardware, operating systems, database management systems, networking, multimedia, etc., and the
environment that houses and supports them that enable the processing of the applications) and people
(internal or outsourced personnel required to plan, organize, acquire, implement, support, monitor and
evaluatetheinformationsystemsandservices).
 The IS Auditor must define, adopt and follow a suitable risk assessment methodology. A
successful risk-based IS audit program can be based on an effective scoring system arrived at by
considering all relevant risk factors. Banks should develop written guidelines on the use of risk
assessment tools and risk factors and review these guidelines with theAudit Committee or the Board of
directors. Risk assessment related guidelines will vary for individual banks depending on their size,
complexity,scopeofactivities,geographicdiversity,andvarioustechnologies/systemsused.
 The IS Audit Plan (either separately or as part of the overall internal audit plan) should be a
formal document, duly approved by the Audit Committee initially and during any subsequent major
changes. The Audit plan should be prepared so that it is in compliance with appropriate external
regulatory/legalrequirements,inadditiontowell-knownISAuditingStandards.
 The IS Audit Head is responsible for the annual IS Audit Plan which is prepared based on the
scoping document and risk assessment.TheAudit plan typically covers the overall audit strategy,scoped
audit areas, details of control objectives identified in the scoping stage, sample sizes, frequency of audit
based on risk assessment, nature and extent of audit and IT audit resources identification. A report on
the status of planned versus actual IS audits, and any changes to the annual IS audit plan, needs to be
presentedperiodicallytotheAuditCommitteeandSeniormanagement.
 IT governance, information security governance related aspects, critical IT general controls like
data centre controls and processes and critical business applications/systems having
financial/compliance implications including MIS and regulatory reporting systems and customer access
points (likedeliverychannels) needtobesubjected toISAudit(orintegrated audit) atleast onceayear(or
morefrequently,ifwarrantedbyriskassessment).
  85
 
 IS Audits should also cover branches, with focus on large and medium branches, in critical
areas like password controls, control of user ids, operating system security, anti-malware controls,
maker-checker controls, segregation of duties, rotation of personnel, physical security, review of
exceptionreports/audittrails,BCPpolicyand testingetc.
 Detailed pre-implementation application control audits and data migration audits with regard to
criticalsystemsneedtobesubjectedtoanindependentexternalaudit.
 Banks also need to conduct a post-implementation detailed application control
audit. Furthermore, banks should also include application control audits in a risk based manner as part
of the regular Internal Audit/IS Audit plans with focus on data integrity (among other factors). General
internal auditors with requisite functional knowledge need to be involved along with the ISAuditors in the
exercisetoprovidetherequisitedomainexpertise.
 IS Auditors should periodically review the results of internal control processes and analyze
financial or operational data for any impact on risk assessment or scoring. Accordingly, various auditee
units should be required to keep auditors up to date on all major changes in departments or functions,
such as the introduction of a new product, implementation of a new system, application conversions,
significantchangesinorganizationorstaff,newregulatoryandlegalrequirements,securityincidentsetc.
 IS Auditors should be reasonably conversant with various fraud risk factors and should assess
the risk of occurrence of irregularities connected with the area under audit. The IS Auditor should also
consider Fraud Vulnerability assessments undertaken by the Fraud Risk Management group, while
identifyingfraudriskfactorsaspartof ITriskassessmentandauditprocess.
 Banks should consider using testing accelerators — tools and techniques that help support the
proceduresISAuditorswillbeperforming—toincreasetheefficiencyandeffectivenessoftheaudit.
 Auditors need to enhance utilization of CAATs, which may be used effectively in areas such as
detectionof revenueleakage, assessingimpact of control weaknesses,monitoring customertransactions
under AML requirements and generally in areas where a large volume and value of transactions are
reported.Suitable“read-only”accessrightsshouldbeprovidedtoauditorsforenablinguseofCAATs.
 Banks may consider, wherever possible, a continuous auditing approach for critical systems,
which involves performing control and risk assessments on a more frequent basis by using technology
suitably.
 The Board (or theAudit Committee) should be informed of Senior Management’s decision on all
significant observations and recommendations. When IS Auditors believe that the bank has accepted a
level of residual risk that is inappropriate for it, they should discuss the matter with InternalAudit function
and Senior Management. If the ISAuditors are not in agreement with the decision regarding residual risk
accepted by the bank, ISAuditors and Senior Management should report the matter to the Board (or the
AuditCommittee)forresolution.
 Services provided by a third party are relevant to the scope of IS Audit of a bank when those
services, and the controls within them, form part of the bank’s information systems. These need to be
adequatelyassessedaspartoftheISAuditprocess.
 In order to provide assurance to management and regulators, banks are required to conduct a
quality assurance, at least once every three years, on the Banks InternalAudit including ISAudit function
to validate the approach and practices adopted by them in the discharge of their responsibilities as laid
outintheAuditPolicy.
 Accreditation and empanelment of IS audit qualifications/certifications and IS audit vendors/firms
canbeconsideredbytheGovernmentofIndia.
OnCyberFraud:
 Most retail cyber frauds and electronic banking frauds would be of values less than Rs.1 crore
and hence may not attract the necessary attention of the Special Committee of the Board. Since these
frauds are large in number and have the potential to reach large proportions, it is recommended that the
  86
 
Special Committee of the Board be briefed separately on this to keep them aware of the proportions of
the fraud and the steps taken by the bank to mitigate them. The Special Committee should specifically
monitor the progress of the mitigating steps taken by the bank in case of electronic frauds and the
efficacyofthesameincontainingfraudnumbersandvalues.
 The activities of fraud prevention, monitoring, investigation, reporting and awareness creation
should be owned and carried out by an independent fraud risk management group in the bank. The
group should be adequately staffed and headed by a senior official of the bank, not below the rank of
GeneralManager/DGM.
 Fraud review councils should be set up by the fraud risk management group with various
business groups in the bank. The council should consist of the head of the business, head of the fraud
risk management department, the headof operations supporting that particular business function and the
head of information technology supporting that business function. The councils should meet at least
every quarter to review fraud trends and preventive steps taken that are specific to that business
function/group.
 Various fraud prevention practices need to be followed by banks. These include fraud
vulnerabilityassessments(forbusinessfunctions and alsodelivery channels), review of new productsand
processes,puttinginplacefraudlosslimits, rootcauseanalysisforactualfraudcases aboveRs.10lakhs,
reviewing cases where a unique modus operandi is involved, ensuring adequate data/information
security measures, following KYC and Know your employee/vendor procedures, ensuring adequate
physical security, sharing of best practices of fraud prevention and creation of fraud awareness among
staffandcustomers.
 No new product or process should be introduced or modified in a bank without the approval of
control groups like compliance, audit and fraud risk management groups. The product or process needs
to be analyzed for fraud vulnerabilities and fraud loss limits to be mandated wherever vulnerabilities are
noticed.
 Banks have started sharing negative/fraudulent list of accounts through CIBIL Detect. Banks
shouldalsostart sharing thedetails of employees whohavedefrauded them sothat they donot get hired
byotherbanks/financialinstitutions.
 Quick fraud detection capability would enable a bank to reduce losses and also serve as a
deterrent to fraudsters. Various important requirements recommended in this regard include setting up a
transaction monitoring group within the fraud risk management group, alert generation and redressal
mechanisms, dedicated e-mail id and phone number for reporting suspected frauds, mystery shopping
andreviews.
 Banks should set up a transaction monitoring unit within the fraud risk management group. The
transaction monitoring team should be responsible for monitoring various types of transactions,
especiallymonitoring ofpotential fraudareas, by meansof which, early alarmscanbetriggered.This unit
needs to have the expertise to analyse transactions to detect fraud trends. This unit should work in
conjunction with the data warehousing and analytics team within banks for data extraction, filtering, and
sanitization for transaction analysis for determining fraud trends. Banks should put in place automated
systemsfordetectionoffraudsbasedonadvancedstatisticalalgorithmsandfrauddetectiontechniques.
 It is widely accepted that fraud investigation is a specialized function. Thus, the fraud risk
managementgroupshouldundergocontinuoustrainingtoenhanceitsskillsandcompetencies.
 Apart from the categories of fraud that need to be reported as per RBI Master Circular on
Frauds dated July 2, 2010, it is recommended that this should also include frauds in the electronic
channels and the variants of plastic cards used by banks and their customers to conclude financial
transactions.
 It has been noted that there is lack of uniformity regarding the amount of fraud to be reported to
RBI. Some banks report the net loss as the fraud amount (i.e. fraud amount minus recovery), while
others report the gross amount. Somedo not report a fraud if the entire amount is recovered. In the case
  87
 
of credit card frauds, some banks follow the practice of reporting the frauds net of chargeback credit
received while others report the amount of the original transactions. To overcome such inconsistency, a
uniformruleofreportingamountsinvolvedinfraudsisbeingrecommended.
 A special mention needs to be made of frauds done by collusive merchants who use
skimmed/stolen cardsat the point of sale (POS) terminals given tothem by banks and then abscond with
the money before the chargeback is received on the transaction. Many banks do not report such cases
stating that the banks which have issued the cards are the ones impacted. However, in these cases, the
merchants cause undue loss to the bank by siphoning off the credit provided. Hence such cases should
bereportedasfrauds.
 It has been observed that in a sharedATMnetwork scenario, when the card of one bank is used
to perpetrate a fraud through another bank’s ATM, there is a lack of clarity on who should report such a
fraud to RBI. It is the bank acquiring the transaction that should report the fraud. The acquiring bank
shouldsolicitthehelpoftheissuingbankinrecoveryofthemoney.
 Employee awareness is crucial to fraudprevention.Training on fraud prevention practices should
beprovidedbythefraudriskmanagementgroupatvariousforums.
 A positive way to create employee awareness is to reward employees who have gone beyond
the call of duty and prevented frauds. Details of employees receiving such awards may be published in
thefraudnewsletters.
 In the case of online frauds, since the jurisdiction is not clear, there is ambiguity on where the
police complaint should be filed and customers/banks have to shuttle between different police units on
the point of jurisdiction. Cybercrime cells are not present in every part of the country. The matter of
having a separate cell working on bank frauds in each state police department, authorized to register
complaints from banks and get the investigations done on the same, needs to be taken up with
respectivepolicedepartments.
 Toenhance investigation skills of thestaffin the fraudriskmanagement group, atraining institute
forfinancialforensicinvestigationmaybesetupbybanksundertheaegisofIBA.
 The experience of controlling/preventing frauds in banks should be shared between banks on a
regular basis. The standing forum provided by the Indian Banks’Association (IBA) can be used to share
bestpracticesandfurtherstrengtheninternalcontrolsinrespectivebanks.
 At each state, a Financial Crime Review Committee needs to be set up on frauds along the lines
of the Security Committee that has been set up by the RBI to review security issues in banks with law
enforcement authorities. The Committee can oversee the creation of awareness by banks among law
enforcementagenciesonnewfraudtypes,especiallytechnologybasedfrauds.
 There needs to multi-lateral arrangements amongst banks to deal with on-line banking frauds.
The lack of such an arrangement amongst banks may force a customer to interact with different banks/
organizationswhenmorethanonebankisinvolved.IBAcouldassistinfacilitatingsuchamechanism.
OnBusinessContinuityPlanning(BCP):
 Abank’s Board has ultimate responsibility and oversight over the business continuity planning of
abank and needs to approve the Business Continuity policy of the bank.Abank’s Senior Management is
responsible for overseeing the business continuity planning process which inter-alia includes determining
how the institution will manage and control identified risks, prioritizing critical business functions,
allocatingknowledgeablepersonnelandsufficientfinancialresourcestoimplementtheBCP.
 AseniorofficialneedstobedesignatedastheHeadofBCPfunction.
 Since electronic banking has functions which are spread across more than one department, it is
necessary that each department understands its role in the plan and the support required to maintain the
plan. In case of disaster, each department has to be prepared for the recovery process aimed at
protection of the critical functions. To this end, a set up like the BCP Committee is charged with the
implementation of the BCP in an eventuality and all departments are expected to fulfill their respective
  88
 
roles in a co-ordinated manner. Hence, a BCP/Crisis Management Committee consisting of senior
officials from various departments like HR, IT, Legal, Business functions and Information Security needs
tobeinstituted.
 There need to be adequate number of teams for handling various aspects of the BCP at the
CentralOfficelevelaswellasindividualZonal/ControllingOfficeandbranchlevels.
 Banks should consider various BCP methodologies and standards, like BS 25999,as inputs for
theirBCPframework.
 The failure of critical systems or the interruption of vital business processes could prevent timely
recovery of operations. Banks must fully understand the vulnerabilities associated with interrelationships
between various systems, departments, and business processes. These vulnerabilities should be
incorporated into the business impact analysis, which analyzes the correlation between system
componentsandtheservicestheyprovide.
 People aspect should be an integral part of a BCP. Too often, plans are focused on technical
issues, therefore it is suggested that a separate section relating to people should be incorporated,
includingdetailsonstaffwelfare,counseling,relocationconsiderations,etc.
 PandemicplanningneedstobeincorporatedaspartoftheBCPframeworkofbanks.
 Banks must regularly test BCP to ensure that they are up to date and effective. Testing of BCP
should include all aspects and constituents of the bank i.e. People, Processes and Resources (including
Technology).
 Banks should involve their Internal Auditors (including IS Auditors) to audit the effectiveness of
BCP and its periodic testing as part of their Internal Audit work and their findings/ recommendations in
thisregardshouldbeincorporatedintheirreporttotheBoardofDirectorsandSeniorManagement.
 Banks should consider having a BCP drill planned along with the critical third parties in order to
derive reasonable level of assurance in ensuring continuity in respect of pre-identified minimal required
processesduringexigencies.
 Banks should performthe DR/BCP test without movement of bank personnel to the DR site.This
willhelpintestingthereadinessofalternativestaffattheDRsite.
 Business continuity plans should be maintained by atleast annual reviews and updates to ensure
theircontinuedeffectiveness.
 Banks should also consider having an unplanned BCP drill, wherein only a restricted set of
peopleandcertainidentifiedpersonnelmaybeawareofthedrillandnotthefloor/businesspersonnel.
 Various detailed requirements relating to procedural, infrastructural and HR related aspects of
BCPhavebeenprovidedsothatbankscanimproveBCPprocessesandgeneratebestoutcomes.
 Therearemanyapplications and services inthe bankingsystem that arehighly missioncritical in
nature and therefore require high availability and fault tolerance to be considered while designing and
implementing the solution. This aspect is to be taken into account especially while designing and
implementingthedatacentresolutionandcorporatenetworksolution.
 The solution architectures of DC and DR are not identical for all applications and services.
Generally, it is observed that critical applications and services, namely the retail, corporate, trade finance
and government business solutions as well as the delivery channels have the same DR configurations
whereas surround or interfacing applications do not have DR support. Banks will have to conduct
periodic reviews with reference to the above aspect and upgrade the DR solutions from time to time and
ensure that all critical applications and support services have perfect replicas in terms of performance
andavailability.
 The configurations of servers, network devices and other products at the DC and DR have to be
identical at all times. This includes the patches that are applied at the DC periodically and the changes
  89
 
made to the software from time to time by customization and parameterization to account for regulatory
requirements,systemchangesetc.
 Periodic checks to ensure data and transaction integrity between DC and DR are mandatory.
Suitableautomatedtoolsmaybeleveragedinthisconnection.
 DR drills currently conducted periodically come under the category of planned shutdown. Banks
have to evolve a suitable methodology to conduct drills which are closer to a real disaster scenario so
that the confidence levels of the technical team taking up this exercise are built up to address
requirementsintheeventofarealdisaster.
 Consideration of telecom related redundancy and alternative data and voice communication
channelsintheeventofexigenciesshouldbeincorporatedaspartofthebusinesscontinuityplanning.
 It is to be ensured that the support infrastructure at the DC and DR, namely the electrical
systems, air-conditioning environment and other support systems do not have a single point of failure
and have a building management and monitoring system to continuously monitor the resources.
Monitoring of uptime has to be made as per the requirements and agreements with respective
vendors. The samerequirements have to be takencare of in case the DC/DR set up is in an outsourced
locationoracommonsharedsetup.
 Given the need for drastically minimizing data loss during exigencies and enabling quick
recovery and continuity of critical business operations, banks need to consider near site DR architecture.
Major banks with significant customer delivery channel usage and significant participation in financial
markets/payment and settlement systems may need to consider a plan of action for creating a near site
DRarchitectureoverthemediumterm(say,threeyears).
 An industry-wide alarm and crisis forum/organization (in which the key market participants and
the most important providers of financial infrastructure services are represented) may be established.
The heads of BCP from the participating institutions can make up the top level of this crisis organization,
with the lower levels forming a network between those responsible for the areas of liquidity, large-value
payments, retail payment transactions and IT.Any of the institutions caninvokethe alarmorganization by
activatingthelevelaffected.
 A website for industry-wide BCP related information for the benefit of the industry can be
considered.
 There are programmes in the US like the Telecommunications Service Priority System (TSPS),
Government Emergency Telecommunications service (GETS) and Wireless Priority Service Program
(WPS) for provision of priority telecom availability and recovery services during exigencies for critical
infrastructures and institutions. Similarly, the Government of India may declare the banking sector,
including financial markets, as critical infrastructure and consider instituting such special measures for
priority infrastructural services to enable conduct of critical banking services and financial market
transactionsduringexigencies.
OnCustomerEducation:
 The Board of Directors/Senior Management need to be committed to the process of consumer
education initiatives by providing adequate resources, evaluating the effectiveness of the process and
fine-tuningandimprovingcustomereducationmeasuresonanongoingbasis.
 Toget desired support for the programme, it is important to identify and involve key stakeholders
in decision-making, planning, implementation and evaluation. A working group or committee can be
created to establish a clear goal for the endpoint in consultation with key stakeholders, clearly define
roles, responsibilities and accountabilities, communicate in an open, clear and timely manner, allowing
for flexibility in approaches to suit different stakeholder needs, support training and development to
ensure a change in behaviour and culture, learn from previous and ongoing experiences and celebrate
achievements.
  90
 
 Banks need to follow a systematic process to develop an awareness programme through the
stagesofplanninganddesign,executionandmanagement,andevaluationandcoursecorrection.
 Since awareness programmes should be customized for the specific audience, it is important to
identify and segment the target users for the programmes - like bank customers, employees, law
enforcementpersonnel,fraudriskprofessionals,mediapartners,etc.
 Building consensus among decision makers and stakeholders for financial and administrative
support is an important step in the programme. In this respect, both fixed and variable costs need to be
identified.
 Since the target groups obtain information from a variety of sources, more than one
communicationchannelcouldbeusedtoengagethemsuccessfully.
 A research group should be formed to continually update the communications team with the
latest trends and evolving modus operandi. The team would maintain a repository of material such as
casestudies,samplemails,samplesoffraudulentdocuments,internationalpractice/developmentsetc.
 Evaluation of the effects of various campaigns for specific target groups can be measured
through qualitative (e.g. focus groups, interviews) and/ or quantitative (e.g. questionnaires, omnibus
surveys) research. Evaluation against metrics, performance objectives, etc. should also be conducted to
checkthecampaign’seffectiveness,andtoestablishlessonslearnedtoimprovefutureinitiatives.
 At the industry level, each bank should have a documented policy, training mechanisms and
research units. Material can be pooled from these units to be used on a larger platform towards a
commongoal.
OnLegalIssues:
 The Risk Management Committee at the Board level needs to put in place processes to ensure
that legal risks arising from cyber laws are identified and adequately addressed. It also needs to ensure
that the concerned functions are adequately staffed and the personnel handling it are trained to carry out
the function efficiently. The Operational Risk Group needs to incorporate legal risks as part of the
operational risk framework and take steps to mitigate the risks assessed. The legal function within the
bankneedstoadvisebusinessgroupsonlegalissuesarisingoutoftheuseofInformationTechnology.
 There should be a robust system in banks to keep track of the transactions of the nature
referred to in statutory guidelines on AML (like PMLA and PMLR) and report the same within the
prescribedperiod.Apartfromtheriskofpenalty,thisinvolvesreputationalriskforsuchentities.
 Under the NI Act, a cheque in the electronic form has been defined as “a mirror image” of a
paper cheque. The expression ‘mirror image’does not appear to be appropriate. The expression, “mirror
image of” may be substituted by the expression, “electronic graphic which looks like” or any other
expressionthatcapturestheintentionadequately.
 The definition of a cheque in electronic form contemplates a digital signature with or without
biometric signature and an asymmetric crypto system. Since the definition was inserted in the year 2002,
it is understandable that it has captured only the digital signature and asymmetric crypto system dealt
with under Section 3 of the IT Act, 2000. Since the IT Act,2000 has been amended in the year 2008 to
make provision for an electronic signature also,a suitable amendment in this regard may be required in
theNIActsothattheelectronicsignaturemayalsobeusedonchequesinelectronicform.
 There is uncertainty with respect to the meaning of a crucial expression like‘intermediary” as per
the ITAct 2000 and as amended by the ITAmendment Act, 2008.As such, it is necessary that clarity is
brought about by a statutory amendment with regard to the meaning of the expression ‘intermediary’ in
sofarasbanksandfinancialinstitutionsareconcerned.
 Acombined readingof Section2(p) and sub-sections(1) and (2)of Section 3of theITAct makes
it clear that in terms of the Act an electronic record may be authenticated by affixing a ‘digital signature’
and if a party wants to authenticate the electronic record by affixing a digital signature, the electronic
method or procedure for affixing the digital signature shall be an asymmetric crypto system and hash
  91
 
function. While authentication of an electronic record by affixing a digital signature is optional, the
procedure for affixing the digital signature, namely, use of an asymmetric crypto system and hash
function,ismandatory.
 The question that arises for consideration is whether a party may be bound by the transactions
entered into through electronic means (whether through ATMs, Internet or otherwise) though the
electronic records in question are not authenticated by using digital/electronic signatures. On reading
Section 65B (1) of the Indian EvidenceAct, it is clear that electronic records may be proved in court even
though they are not authenticated by using digital or electronic signatures if the conditions mentioned
therein aresatisfied. The difficulty in proving the various conditions set forth in sub-sections (2) and (3) of
section 65B of the Indian EvidenceAct is ameliorated to a great extent by sub-section (4) thereof under
whichthecertificateof apersonoccupying aresponsibleofficial positioninrelation totheoperationof the
relevant device or the management of the relevant activities (whichever is appropriate) shall be evidence
ofanymatterstatedinthecertificate.
 The Government should specify sufficient number of agencies under section 79A of the Indian
Evidence Act to assist courts to arrive at a decision on the evidentiary value of electronic records
irrespectiveofwhetheradigitalorelectronicsignatureisaffixed.
 Financial transactions such as operation of bank accounts and credit card operations are being
carriedonby banksin abig way byusing cards, pinnumbersandpasswords, etc. Banksareusing many
security features to prevent frauds to the extent possible. The proposed ‘two factor authentication
method’ (2F method) is also a step in the same direction. It may not be ideal to mandate a particular
technology (digital signatures with asymmetric crypto system and hash function) for authenticating all
electronictransactionsbybanks.
 As a short term measure, it is recommended that Rules may be framed by the Central
Government under Section 5 of the IT Act, to the effect that, with respect to internet or e- banking
transactions, the 2F method or any other technique of authentication provided by banks and used by the
customers shall be valid and binding with respect to such transactions, even if a ‘digital signature’ or
‘electronicsignature’isnotaffixed.
 The ISP license restricts the level of encryption for individuals, groups or organizations to a key
length of only 40 bits in symmetric key algorithms or equivalents. RBI has stipulated SSL/ 128 bit
encryption as a minimum level of security. SEBI has stipulated 64/128 bit encryption for Internet Based
Trading and Services. Information Technology (CertifyingAuthorities) Rules, 2000 require’ internationally
proven encryption techniques’to be used for storing passwords.An Encryption Committee constituted by
the Central Government under Section 84Aof the ITAct, 2000 is in the process of formulating rules with
respecttoencryption.Allowanceforhigherencryptionstrengthmaybeallowedforbanks.
 Section 43A of the IT Act deals with the aspect of compensation for failure to protect data. The
Central Government has not prescribed the term 'sensitive personal data,' nor has it prescribed a
“standard and reasonable security practice”. Until these prescriptions are made, data is afforded security
and protection only as may be specified in an agreement between the parties or as may be specified in
anylaw.
 The IT Act, 2000 as amended, exposes the banks to both civil and criminal liability. The civil
liability could consist of exposure to pay damages by way of compensation upto ` 5 crore under the
amended Information Technology Act before the Adjudicating Officer and beyond ` 5 crore in a court of
competent jurisdiction.The topmanagement of banks couldalso sufferexposure tocriminal liabilitygiven
the provisions of Chapter XI of the amended Information Technology Act and the exposure to criminal
liabilitycouldconsistofimprisonmentforatermwhichwouldextendfromthreeyearstolifeimprisonment,
asalso afine. Further,various computer relatedoffences areenumeratedunder various provisions of the
Act.
 Of late there have been many instances of ‘phishing’ in the banking industry, posing a major
threat to customers availing internet banking facilities. Though Section 66D of the amended ITAct could
broadly be said to cover the offence of phishing, the attempt to commit the act of phishing is not made
  92
 
punishable. It is suggested that there is a need to specifically provide for punishment for an attempt to
phishaswell,inordertodeterpersonsfromattemptingit.
 The issue of whether Section 43Aread with Section 72 and 72Aof the ITAct, 2000 address the
issue of data protection adequately or whether they need to be supplemented by long-term
provisions(which can help facilitate effective and efficient protection and preservation of data), would
depend on the prescriptions of the Central Government. Various suggestions have been offered in this
reportinthisregard.
 It is necessary to balance the interests of customers and those of banks and provide protection
to banks against any fraudulent or negligent acts by the customer. It is not appropriate to leave such an
important issue to be dealt with in documentation.Appropriate statutory provisions need to be enacted in
thisregard.
 Though there is no specific legislation in India which deals only with ‘electronic fundtransfer’and
which is consumer protection driven, certain concerns have been dealt with in the Payment and
Settlement SystemsAct, Rules, Regulations, directions, etc. issued thereunder as well as the provisions
of general law. However, it may be apposite to have some provisions similar to those in the EFT Act
which exempts the bank from liability in the event of fraud by the customer or a technical failure, etc. (for
eg., provisions dealing with ‘unauthorized electronic fund transfers’ and the consumer’s liability for
unauthorizedtransfers).
CERT-In(theIndianComputerEmergencyResponseTeam)
CERT-In(theIndianComputerEmergencyResponseTeam)isagovernment-mandatedinformationtechnology(IT)
security organization. The purpose of CERT-In is to respond to computer security incidents, report on
vulnerabilitiesandpromoteeffectiveITsecuritypracticesthroughoutthecountry.
CERT-InwascreatedbytheIndianDepartmentofInformationTechnologyin2004andoperatesundertheauspices
of that department. According to the provisions of the Information Technology Amendment Act 2008, CERT-In is
responsibleforoverseeingadministrationoftheAct.
CERT organizations throughout the world are independent entities, although there may be coordinated activites
amonggroups.ThefirstCERTgroupwasformedintheUnitedStatesatCarnegieMellonUniversity.
CERT-InisoperationalsinceJanuary2004.TheconstituencyofCERT-InistheIndianCyberCommunity.CERTIn
isthenationalnodalagencyforrespondingtocomputersecurityincidentsasandwhentheyoccur.
IntherecentInformationTechnologyAmendmentAct2008,CERT-Inhasbeendesignatedtoserveasthenational
agencytoperformthefollowingfunctionsintheareaofcybersecurity:
  93
 
Collection,analysisanddisseminationofinformationoncyberincidents.
Forecastandalertsofcybersecurityincidents
Emergencymeasuresforhandlingcybersecurityincidents
Coordinationofcyberincidentresponseactivities.
Issueguidelines,advisories,vulnerabilitynotesandwhitepapersrelatingtoinformationsecuritypractices,procedures,
prevention,responseandreportingofcyberincidents.
Suchotherfunctionsrelatingtocybersecurityasmaybeprescribed
  94
 
MCQS
1. Tobeconsideredacomputercrime,what needstobeinvolvedinthecrime?
A) Technology
B) Computers
C) Data
D) Networks
2. Whatcategoryofsoftwareisdesignedtocausedetrimenttoyourcomputer?
A) Bugs
B) Malware
C) Systemssoftware
D) Networksnakes
3. Whatwormemailedpeoplewiththewords"ILOVEYOU"intheyear2000?
A) TheLoveBug
B) TheLoveLetter
C) TheValentineConnection
D) TheDarlingLink
4. Whattypeofvirusdescribestheawfulconsequencesofnot actingimmediately?
A) Android
B) Spoofing
C) Misleadinge-mail
D) Phishing
5. Whichcomputervirusrecordseverymovementyoumakeonyourcomputer?
A) MalwareAndroid
B) Keylogger
C) DoS
D) Trapper
6. WhatisitcalledwhensomeonechangestheFROMsectionofanemailsothatthemessageyou
receiveappearstocomefromapersonotherthantheonewhosentit?
A) Spoofing
B) DoS
C) Spam
D) Trapper
7. Whatprogramwouldyouusetogainadministrativerightstosomeone'scomputer?
A) Bot
B) ExecutiveAndroid
C) Rootkit
D) Trojanhorse
8. Whatisyourcomputercalledwhenitisinfectedwithamalwarebot?
A) Zombie
B) Android
C) E-Ogre
D) Dirtybot
9. Whattypeofhackerwasthe16year-oldindividualwhohackedintoNASAnetworksanddownloaded
temperatureandhumiditycontrolsoftwareworth$1.7billion?
A) Thrill-seekerhacker
B) Black-hathacker
  95
 
C) Script kiddie
D) White-hathacker
10. Whatisapersoncalledwhentheytrytohurt agroupofpeoplewiththeuseofacomputer?
A) White-hatintruder
B) Cracker
C) Socialengineer
D) Cyberterrorist
ANSWERS:
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
B B A C B A C A D D
MCQs2
Q1.ComputercrimeorCybercrimeiscrimethatinvolves:
a)Computer
b)Network
c)BothofAbove*
d)NoneofThese
Q2.Netcrimeiscriminalexploitationofthe___:
a)Browsers
b)Servers
c)Internet*
d)NoneofThese
Q3.CrimethroughInternetincludes:
a)Telemarketing
b)Internetfraud
c)IdentityTheft
d)CreditCardaccountthefts
e)AlloftheAbove*
f)NoneofThese
Q4.Whichamongthefollowingiscorrectabout"Hacking":
a)Hackingisanillegalintrusionintoacomputersystemand/ornetwork.
b)CrackingtermisequivalenttoHacking(InIndianLawsperspectivethereisnodifferencebetweenthe
termhackingandcracking).
c)Everyactcommittedtowardsbreakingintoacomputerand/ornetworkishacking.
  96
 
d)Hackercanhackorpersonalmonetarygains,suchastostealingthecreditcardinformation,
transferringmoneyfromvariousbankaccountstotheirownaccountfollowedbywithdrawalofmoney.
e)AlloftheAbove*
f)NoneofThese
Q5.Whichamongthefollowingiscorrectabout"ChildPornography":
a)Pedophileslurethechildrenbydistributingpornographicmaterial.
b)Pedophilesfalselyrepresenttheirselvesasofsameageandwintheconfidenceofchildrenby
chattingandbysendingimages.
c)Pedophilesafterwiningtheconfidenceofchildrenthenoffersthenmonetaryaswellasphysical
awards.
d)Pedophilesmaysexuallyexploitthechildrenbyusingthemassexualobjectsorbytakingtheir
pornographicpictures,inordertosellthoseovertheinternet.
e)AlloftheAbove*
f)NoneofThese
Q6. Whichamongthefollowingcharacteristicsarecorrectabout'Cyberstalking':
a)Cyberstalkingistheuseoftheinternetorelectronicstostalkorharassanindividualoranygroup.
b)Itincludesmakingharassingphonecalls,killingthevictimspet,vandalizingvictimsproperty, leaving
writtenmessagesorobjects
c)Itmaybeofflineaswellasonline
d)AlloftheAbove*
e)NoneofThese
Q7.Denial-of-serviceattackincludes:
a)atype ofattackonanetworkthatisdesignedtobringthenetworktoitskneesbyfloodingitwith
uselesstraffic
b)DoSattacksareincludedinit.
c)Bothof Above*
d)NoneofThese
Q8.Whichamongthefollowingiswrongcharacteristicof"Phishing":
a)Fakers,byofferingspecialrewardsormoneyprizeetcaskedforpersonalinformationsuchas
passwords,creditcardinformation,socialsecurityandbankaccountnumbersorothermaterial
information.
b)Mainpurposeistheftormisusetheacquiredmaterial
c)BothofAbove
d)NoneofThese*
Q9.CreditCardFraudincludes:
a)Creditcardsareillegallygetandusedtogetmovableorimmovableproperty
b)Unauthorizedandillegaluseof credit cards
c)BothofAbove*
d)NoneofThese
Q10.PunishmentforHackinginInidais:
a)Imprisonmentupto3yearsonly
b)Fine(Dependoncasetocase)only
c)BothofAbove*
d)NoneofThese
Q11.Whichamongthefollowingisbestsuitableforterm"SoftwarePiracy":
a)Counterfeitingoriginalproducts
  97
 
b)Illegalcopyingofgenuineprogram
c)BothofAbove*
d)NoneofThese
Q12.WhichamongthefollowingareMaliciousSoftwares:
a)VirusandWorms
b)TrojanHorseandTimeBomb
c) LogicBombandRabbitandBacterium
d)NoneofThese
e)AlloftheAbove*
Q13.IRCstandsfor:
a)InternetRelayChat*
b)InternalRelyChat
c)InformationRelayChat
d)NoneofThese
Q14MODrefersto:
a)MonitorofDeception
b)MasterofDeception
c)ManagementofDeception*
d)NoneofThese
Q15.INTERPOLstandsfor:
a)InternationalPolice*
b)InternalPolythims
c)InternetProtocol
d)NoneofThese
MCQs3
1. Thefirstcomputervirusis--------
A.ILoveYouB.BlasterC.SasserD.Creeper*
2. MCAfeeisanexampleof
A.PhotoEditingSoftwareB. QuickHealC.VirusD.Antivirus*
3. WhichofthefollowingisknownasMalicioussoftware?
  98
 
A.illegalwareB.badwareC.malware*D.maliciousware
4. Toprotectacomputerfromvirus,youshouldinstall--------inyourcomputer.
A.backupwizardB.diskcleanupC.antivirusD.diskdefragmenter
Answerc
5. VIRUSstandsfor
A.VeryIntelligentResultUntilSourceB.VeryInterchangedResourceUnderSearchC.Vital
InformationResourceUnderSlegeD.ViralImportantRecordUserSearched
Answer c
6. Whichofthefollowingisnotanantivirussoftware?
A.AVGB.AvastC.CodeRedD.MCAfee
Answer c
7. Whatisshortformalicioussoftware(issoftwaredesignedtodisruptcomputeroperation,
gathersensitiveinformation,orgainunauthorizedaccesstocomputersystems)?
A.MalwareB.MoleculewarC.MalisoftD.Malairasoft
AnswerA
  99
 
8. Whichofthefollowingis/arethreatsforelectronicpaymentsystems?
A.ComputerwormsB.ComputervirusC.TrojanhorseD.Alloftheabove
AnsweALL
9. Whichofthefollowingvirusovertakecomputersystem,whenitbootsanddestroy
information?
A.SysteminfectorsB.TrojanC.BootinfectorsD.Stealthvirus
Answerc
10. Keyloggerisa
A.FirmwareB.AntivirusC.SpywareD.Alloftheabove
Answer c
11. Toprotectyourselffromcomputerhacker,youshouldturnona
A.ScriptB.FirewallC.VLCD.Antivirus
Answerc
12. Firewallsareusedtoprotectagainst--------
A.datadrivenattacksB.fireattacksC.virusattacksD.unauthorisedaccess
Answerd
  100
 
13. Whichofthefollowingwouldmostlikelynotbeasymptomofavirus?
A.ThewebbrowseropenstoanunusualhomepageB.Oddmessageorimagesaredisplayedon
thescreenC.Existingprogram filesandiconsdisappearD.TheCD–ROMstopsfunctioning
Answerd
14. Coderedisa(n)----------
A.WordProcessingSoftwareB.AntivirusC.VirusD.PhotoEditingSoftware
Answer b
15. --------softwareareprogramsthatareinstalledontoyourcomputerandcanscanand
removeknownviruseswhichyoumayhavecontracted.
A.FirmmwareB.AdwareC.KeyloggerD.Antivirus
Answerd
16. Whichofthefollowingdescribesprogramsthatcanrunindependentlytravelfromsystem
tosystemanddisruptcomputercommunication?
A.VirusesB.TrojansC.DroppersD.Worm
Answerd
  101
 
17. A--------isacomputerprogram thatcanreplicateitselfandspreadfromonecomputerto
another.
A.AntivursB.PenDriveC.MouseD.ComputerVirus
Answerd
18. Authenticationis
A.modificationB.insertionC.hardtoassureidentityofuseronaremotesystemD.noneofthe
above
Answer c
19. --------areattemptsbyindividualstoobtainconfidentialinformationfromyoutofalsifying
theiridentity.
A.ComputervirusesB.PhishingscamsC.PhishingtripsD.Spywarescams
Answerb
20. Avirusthatmigratesfreelywithinalargepopulationofunauthorizedemailuseriscalled
a-------
A.flamewarB.wormC.macroD.plagiarism
Answerc
21. --------areoftendeliveredtoaPCthroughanemail attachmentandareoftendesignedto
doharm.
  102
 
A.SpamB.EmailC.PortalsD.Virus
Answerd
22. Thealteringofdatasothatitisnotusableunlessthechangesareundoneis
A.ergonomicsB.compressionC.biometricsD.encryption
Answerd
23. Whenalogicbombisactivatedbyatimerelatedevent,itisknownas-------
A.virusB.trojanhorseC.timerelatedbombsequenceD.timebomb
Answerd
24. A-------isacomputerprogram thatcaninvadecomputerandperform avarietyof
functionsrangingfromannoying(e.g.poppingupmessagesasajoke)todangerous(e.g.deleting
files
ordestroyingyourharddisk).
A.MsWordB.MsAccessC.AntivirusD.ComputerVirus
AnswerD
  103
 
Recollectedquestions:
Cybercrimesarehandledbywhichorganizationinindia
Type1crime
Preventivecontrol
Detectivecontrol
Detterantcontrol
Logicalcontrol
Sectionsandtheirfinewithimprisonmentinyears
Committeesofitsecurity,itgovernance,itcontrols
Netrabywhichorganisation
Fastflux
Stuxnet
Phising
Shouldersurfing
Digitalsignature
Oldestagencyinindia
Fewquestionsoncertin
Passiveattack
Activeattack
Directattack
Indirectattack
Logicbomb
Zeus
Indiaownoperatingsystembossinunderwhom
Confidentiality
Availability
Integrity
Conventionalcrime
Cybercrime
Samefeaturesofconvandcybercrime
Tailgating
imptopicsare 1differencesbetweenvirusesandworm
2itact
3differenttypesofcybercrimes
4varioustypesofcards
  104
 
5gatewaypayment
6preventionanddetectioncontrol
7pssact
82tierauthentication
9passiveandactiveattacks
mostlyquestionsfrom2 and3and4...units
Cyberterrorism
Preventionofcybercrimeandfruadmanagementtoday'srecollectedquestions
CybercrimeRecollectedQuestionsdate-08/07/18
Q1.whatishoneypot.
Q2.WhatarestepsinvolvedinaEcommercetransactions.
Q3.Differencebetweendurabilityandconsistency.
Q4.Whatisfirewell.
Q5.whatiswankwormandNASA.
Q6.Eucppublishedinwhichyear.
Q7.OLAisnot apopularappstore.
Q8.whatiscircumstantialevidences.
Q9.BOSS(Bharatoperatingsystemsolutionwasdevelopedbywhichorganizations-CDAC
Q10.whatismaliciouscodewriter's.
Q11.Whatismultylayeredsecurity
Q12.Whatisdata.
Q13.blackmailingisanexampleofcyberextortion.
Q14what isSCADA.
  105
 
Q15.whatiscryptolocker
Q16.smartcardinmetrorailwaystationsareexamples
Q17.packetfilterfirewall.
Q18.microATM.
Q19.crosssiteScripting.
Q20.WhatisAhectivist...
Q21.Rupaycardisissuedinwhichyear.
Q22what isTrojanhourse.
Q23.Whatismalware.
Q.24.databackupisanexampleofwhichtypeofcontrol.
Q25.whatisLebanceloopmodulasoprendiinatmcardfrauds.
Q26.CCTVisanexampleofwhichcontrol.
Q27.whatisCyberSmearing.
Q28.whatisoperatingsystemvulnerability
Q29.whatisfullformofCISAcybersecurityinformationsharingAct.
Q30whatiszeusviruses.
Q31.whatishashhvalueandintegrity.
Q32.wdifferencebetweenAuthirizationandAuthentication.
Q33.WhatisINFOstealer.
Q34.e.whatisAbeckEndAccess.
Q35.whatismeaningofphraseof"AbinitioUnlawfullyorUnlegally.
Q36.whatissecurityAdministrationandQualityAssurance.
Q37.whatisCAPTCHA.
Q38.IntentionallymisrepresentationofDataiscalledAFraud.
Q39.WhatisdefinitionofControl.Q40.WhatisAJohnDeoOrder....
Q41.whatispaymentwalkedanddigitalwallet
Q42what isAnonymous.
  106
 
Q43.Whatistrapdooraccess.A
Q44..TotalbranchautomationTMA.
Q45..comand.orgareTLD.
Q46.TCSfraudinAndhraPradeshisanexampleofreasonablesecuritypractisesandprocedures.
Q47.ThePVCLcaseinIndiareferstowhichActofITactAct_69powertomoniter,interceptorBlock
URL.
Q48.onequestiononCBSandTBAtotalbranchAutomations.
Q49.SysadminsysuserortellerallareexamplesofSpoofing.
Q50.whatisAnetworkAnalysis.
Q51.whatisvulnerability
Q52.whatisDNSsinkholding.
Q53.e.Contactlesssmartcardareexampleofwhich.
Q54.LebanceLoopcardfraudrubberbandtypematerialinsideAtmFraud.
Q55.whatisContigencypkanning.
Q56.whatisNigrean419Fraud.
Q57.DumpsterDiving.
Q58.whatisdiffrencebetweenSteersmanandscriptkiddle
Q59.Staganography.
Q60.WhatisSSLinjectionsandCrossSiteScripting......
Recollectedquestionsfrompreventionofcybercrimesandfraudmanagement...
Scriptkiddie
Preventioncontrol,deterrentcontrol,
Interpol(whichindianagencyco-ordinatewithit)
Zeus
FromwhichyearUCPiseffective
  107
 
UTM
Asymmetricandsymmetricencryption(2questions)
Cert
I4C
ITactandITamendmentact(3questionsapprox)
Bluehathacker
Eavesdropping
Mitm
Didi
Digitalsignature
Howtomakeemailsecure---SSL,SHAliketech
Integrity
Authentication
BasicquestionsJustforKnowledge
1.Explainrisk,vulnerabilityandthreat?
Vulnerability(weakness)is agap inthe protection effortsof asystem, athreat is anattackerwho exploits
that weakness. Risk is the measure of potential loss when that the vulnerability is exploited by the threat
e.g. Default username and password for a server – An attacker can easily crack into this server and
compromiseit.
2.WhatisthedifferencebetweenAsymmetricandSymmetricencryptionandwhichoneisbetter?
Symmetric encryption uses the same key for both encryption and decryption, while Asymmetric
encryptionusesdifferentkeysforencryptionanddecryption.
Symmetricisusuallymuchfasterbutthekeyneedstobetransferredoveranunencryptedchannel.
Asymmetric on the other hand is more secure but slow. Hence, a hybrid approach should be preferred.
Settingupachannelusingasymmetricencryptionandthensendingthedatausingsymmetricprocess.
3.WhatisanIPSandhowdoesitdiffersfromIDS?
  108
 
