SYLLABUS
1)IntroductiontoFEMA
a)GenesisofFEMAandrepealofFERA
b)ComparisonbetweenFEMA1999andFERA1973
c)ImportantsectionsofFEMA1999anduptodateamendments,schedules-I,
IIandIII
d)CompoundingprovisionsunderFEMAandtheeffectofnon-adherenceto
FEMAprovisions
2)FacilitiesavailabletoresidentsunderFEMAandtheregulationsthatareapplicabletoIndividuals
coveringareassuchas
a)MeaninganddefinitionofresidentinIndia
b)Foreigntravel
c)Outwardremittances/advanceremittances/inwardremittances
d)RefundofinwardremittancesandimportanceAML
e)Maintenanceofforeigncurrencyaccounts
f)Permissionsforinvestmentsabroad
g)Borrowingsinforeigncurrency
h)Exportofgiftsandforwardcontracts
I)ForeigncurrencyTCspurchaseandencashment
j)Internationalcreditcards
3)Facilitiesavailabletoandregulationsapplicabletonon-residentindividuals
a)Meaninganddefinitionofnon-residentIndianandForeignnational
b)Variousschemesfornon-residentIndians
c)NRE,FCNRandONRaccountschemes
d)DeductionofTDSforNROaccounts-taxtreaties
e)Taxhavensandcautionsinhandlingremittances
f)BorrowingopportunitiesandinvestmentfacilitiesinIndia
g)Guaranteesbynon-residentsanddepositsotherthanbankdeposits
h)Riskmanagementfornon-residents
4)Miscellaneousaspects
a)Inandoutboundremittances
b)OpeningofforeigncurrencyandRupeeaccountsinandoutsideIndia
c)GuidelinesontaxationandTDS
4
 
Foreign Exchange Management Act (FEMA)
Main Features of the Foreign Exchange Management Act (FEMA)
The Foreign Exchange Management Act (FEMA) was an act passed in the winter
session of Parliament in 1999, which replaced Foreign Exchange Regulation Act. This
act seeks to make offences related to foreign exchange civil offences. It extends to the
whole of India.
The Foreign Exchange Regulation Act (FERA) of 1973 in India was replaced on June
2000 by the Foreign Exchange Management Act (FERA), which was passed in 1999.
The FERA was passed in 1973 at a time when there was acute shortage of foreign
exchange in the country.
It had a controversial 27 years stint during which many bosses of the Indian corporate
world found themselves at the mercy of the Enforcement Directorate. Moreover, any
offence under FERA was a criminal offence liable to imprisonment. But FEMA makes
offences relating to foreign civil offences.
FEMA had become the need of the hour to support the pro- liberalisation policies of the
Government of India. The objective of the Act is to consolidate and amend the law
relating to foreign exchange with the objective of facilitating external trade and
payments for promoting the orderly development and maintenance of foreign exchange
market in India.
FEMA extends to the whole of India. It applies to all branches, offices and agencies
outside India owned or controlled by a person, who is a resident of India and also to
any contravention there under committed outside India by two people whom this Act
applies.
5
 
The Main Features of the FEMA:
The following are some of the important features of Foreign Exchange
Management Act:
i. It is consistent with full current account convertibility and contains provisions for
progressive liberalisation of capital account transactions.
ii. It is more transparent in its application as it lays down the areas requiring specific
permissions of the Reserve Bank/Government of India on acquisition/holding of foreign
exchange.
iii. It classified the foreign exchange transactions in two categories, viz. capital account
and current account transactions.
iv. It provides power to the Reserve Bank for specifying, in , consultation with the
central government, the classes of capital account transactions and limits to which
exchange is admissible for such transactions.
v. It gives full freedom to a person resident in India, who was earlier resident outside
India, to hold/own/transfer any foreign security/immovable property situated outside
India and acquired when s/he was resident.
vi. This act is a civil law and the contraventions of the Act provide for arrest only in
exceptional cases.
vii. FEMA does not apply to Indian citizen’s resident outside India.
6
 
Difference between the FERA and FEMA:
4 Main Participants of Foreign Exchange Market
The participants are: 1. Commercial Banks or Market Makers 2. Foreign Exchange
Brokers 3. Central Banks or Reserve Bank of India 4. Corporates and Entrepreneurs.
Participant # 1. Commercial Banks or Market Makers:
Commercial banks are normally taking over the position to support the economy of the
country by carrying over the foreign currency from one period to another, for meeting
the future need of the country. They are also sometime making short sale (agree to sell
or actually sell the foreign currency without any real capacity to sell through or borrow
the required currency from others) of foreign currency to satisfy the need of firms to
make payments.
Later on to bring the position in equilibrium, they quote the rates for buying and selling
of foreign currency accordingly. As they are buying the foreign currency from the
customer, the rate they quote for buying the foreign currency is technically named as
Bid rate. When they sell the foreign currency to customer, the rate they quote is
technically known as Ask rate.
Participant # 2. Foreign Exchange Brokers:
ADVERTISEMENTS:
7
 
FE brokers do not buy or sell the foreign currency on their own account, as done by
market makers. They are working as an intermediary between two parties, to satisfy
their respective needs. As they are working as a bridge between buyers and sellers of
the foreign currency, they are only earning the fees in the form of brokerage charges.
Participant # 3. Central Banks or Reserve Bank of India:
To protect the financial strength and stability of the country’s balance of payments,
internal money supply, interest rates and inflation, RBI intervenes in the foreign
exchange markets to protect the disequilibrium in the prices of foreign exchange
conversion.
Participant # 4. Corporates and Entrepreneurs:
Corporate are the players in the FE market, to satisfy their need of payment in foreign
currency towards imports of goods, commodities and services. On the opposite way,
they need to convert foreign currency in home currency on account of export of goods,
commodities, and services. The need of conversion also happens on account of
transactions in financial markets across the globe, for loan disbursement, repayment of
loans, receipt and payment of annual charges, etc.
Provisions of Foreign Exchange Management Act
Provisions of Foreign Exchange Management Act (FEMA) provides free transaction on
current account subject to the guidelines by the RBI. Enforcement of Foreign Exchange
Management Act (FEMA) is entrusted to a separate directorate, which undertakes
investigations on contraventions of the Act.
Provisions of FEMA are grouped under four heads. Important provisions under each of
the four heads, having a bearing on promoting economic development through foreign
investment with enabling provisions to ensure the curtailing of inflationary trends from
such transactions, are outlined below.
Regulation for Current Account Transaction:
Any person can sell or draw foreign exchange to or from an authorised dealer (if such
sale or withdrawal is a current account transaction) except for certain prohibited
transactions like remittance of lottery winnings, remittance of interest income on funds
held in Non-Resident Special Rupee (NRSR) account scheme, etc.
Besides these cases, there are certain other transactions, for which specific RBI
approval will be required. For instance, Reserve Bank approval is required for
importers availing of Supplier’s Credit beyond 180 days and Buyer’s Credit irrespective
of the period of credit.
Authorised dealers are permitted remittance of surplus freight/passage collections by
shipping/airline companies or their agents, multimodal transport operators, etc. after
verification of documentary evidence in support of the remittance.
8
 
Regulations Relating to Capital Account Transactions:
i. Foreign nationals are not allowed to invest in any company or partnership firm or
proprietary concern, which is engaged in the business of Chit Fund or in Agricultural or
Plantation activates or in Real Estate business (other than development of township,
construction of residential/commercial premises, roads or bridges) or construction of
farm houses or trading in Transferable Development Rights (TDRs). Listing of
permissible classes of Capital account transaction for a person resident in India and
also by a person resident outside India has been provided in the regulations.
ii. Detailed rules and regulations are provided on borrowing and lending in Foreign
Currency as well as India Rupee by a person resident in India form/to a person
resident outside India either on non-repatriation or repatriation basis.
iii. Authorised dealers are now permitted to grant rupee loans to NRIs against security
of shares or immovable property in India, subject to certain terms and conditions.
Authorised dealers or housing finance institutions approved by National Housing Bank
can also grant rupee loans to NRIs for acquisition of residential accommodations
subject to certain terms and conditions.
iv. General permission has been granted to Indian company (including Non-Banking
Finance Company) registered with Reserve Bank to accept deposits from NRIs on
repatriation basis subject to the terms and conditions specified in the schedule.
Indian proprietorship concern/firm or a company (including Non-Banking Finance
Company) registered with Reserve Bank can also accept deposits from NRIs on non-
repatriation basis subject to the terms and conditions specified in the schedule.
Regulations relating to export of goods and services:
Export proceeds are required to be realised within a period of 6 months from the date
of shipment. In the case of exports to a warehouse established abroad with the
approval of Reserve Bank, the proceeds have to be realised within 15 months from the
date of shipment.
An enabling provision has been made in this regulation to delegate powers to
authorised dealers to allow extension of time. Export of goods on elongated credit
terms beyond six months requires prior approval of Reserve Bank.
Other Regulations:
i. A person resident in India to whom any foreign exchange is due or has accrued is
obligated to take reasonable steps to realise and repatriate to India such foreign
exchange unless an exemption has been provided in the Act or regulations made
under the general or special permission of Reserve Bank.
9
 
ii. Any foreign exchange due or accrued as remuneration for services rendered or in
settlement of any lawful obligation or an income on assets held outside India or as
inheritance, settlement or gift to a person resident in India should be sold to an
authorised person within a period of seven days of its receipt and in all other cases
within 90 days of its receipt.
iii. Any person who has drawn exchange for any purpose but has not utilised it for the
same or any other purpose permissible under the provisions of the Act should
surrender such foreign exchange or un-utilised foreign exchange to an authorised
person within a period of 60 days from the date of acquisition.
Where, however, exchange was drawn for travel abroad, the un-utilised exchange in
excess of the limit up to which foreign exchange is permitted to be retained, should be
surrendered to an authorised person within 90 days from the date of return of the’
traveller to India if unspent exchange is in the form of travellers cheques.
iv. The Reserve Bank has specified the limit for possession and retention of foreign
currency by a person resident in India. There is no restriction on possession of foreign
coins by any person. Any person resident in India is permitted to retain in aggregate
foreign currency not exceeding US$ 2000 or its equivalent in the form of currency
notes/bank notes or travellers cheques acquired by him from approved sources.
v. The Reserve Bank has granted general permission to any person to receive any
payment:
(a) made in rupees by order or on behalf of a person resident outside India during his
stay in India by converting the foreign exchange into rupees by sale to an authorised
person;
(b) made by means of a cheque drawn on a bank outside India or a bank draft or
travellers cheques issued outside India or made in foreign currency notes directly,
provided the cheques, drafts or foreign currency is sold to an authorised person within
seven days of its receipt;
(c) by means of a postal order or money order issued by a post office outside India.
vi. Reserve bank has also granted general permission to a person resident in India to
make payment in rupees;
(a) for extending hospitality’ to a person resident outside India;
(b) to a person resident outside India for purchase of gold or silver imported by such
person in accordance with the provisions of any order issued by Central Government
under the Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation) Act, 1992 or under any law or
rules or regulations in force.
OVERVIEW OF FOREIGN EXCHANGE MANAGEMENT ACT
BACKGROUND – EVOLUTION OF FOREIGN EXCHANGE REGULATIONS IN INDIA
10
 
Exchange regulations have always remained at the centre of Indian economy.
Exchange controls
were first introduced in India during the Second World War (1942). Soon after
independence, they
were formally reaffirmed in form of the first Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1949
(FERA). This was
followed by FERA, 1973. The control framework under FERA was essentially
transaction based in
terms of which all transactions in foreign exchange including those between residents
to nonresidents
were prohibited unless specifically permitted.
Transformation from control-to-management: FERA to FEMA
The 1970s and 1980s saw the rise of large external sector imbalances on account of
persistent
increase in adverse balance of payments situation. There was over dependence on
official foreign
aid. It was this balance of payment crisis that triggered the wave of economic
liberalization. The
Indian rupee became market determined in 1993. The need was felt to consolidate and
amend the
law relating to foreign exchange with the objectives of facilitating external trade and
payments and
for promoting the orderly development and maintenance of foreign exchange market in
India.
Accordingly, on June 1, 2000, the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (FEMA)
was brought in
force to replace the then existing Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973 (FERA).
FEMA has been
enacted with an objective of facilitating external trade and payments and for promoting
the orderly
development and maintenance of foreign exchange market tin India. As such it is quite
opposed to
FERA which was enacted to regulate or control the foreign exchange. FEMA provided
a de jure status
to the shift in policies with regard to the external sector reforms that began in 1990-91.
STRUCTURE OF FEMA
The present framework of exchange controls in India, consist of basic legislation
(FEMA, 1999) and
Notifications, Rules and Circulars [known as Authorized Persons Directions – AP (Dir
Series)] issued
by RBI. FEMA applies to the whole of India and all branches, offices and agencies
outside India which
are owned or controlled by a person resident in India. It also applies to any
contraventions
committed outside India by any person to whom FEMA applies.
There are 49 sections under FEMA, of which 9 sections (section 1 to 9) are substantive
and the rest
are procedural / administrative provisions as tabulated below:
Section Description
1 Application and Commencement of FEMA
2 Definitions
11
 
3 to 9 Provisions relating to Regulations and Management of Foreign Exchange
10 to 12 Provisions relating to Authorized Person
13 to 15 Provisions relating to Contraventions and Penalties
16 to 38 Provisions relating to Adjudication, Appeal and Directorate of Enforcement
39 to 49 Miscellaneous Provisions
Section 46 of FEMA grants power to the Central Government to make rules to carry out
the
provisions of FEMA and Section 47 of FEMA grants power to the Reserve Bank of
India (RBI) to make
regulations to implement provisions and the rules made under FEMA. Thus RBI is
entrusted with the
administration and implementation of FEMA.
CAPITAL ACCOUNT TRANSACTION AND CURRENT ACCOUNT TRANSACTION:
In August 1994 India accepted Article VIII of the Articles of agreement of the
International Monetary
Fund and became fully convertible on the current account. Since India is fully
convertible on the
current account, all current account transactions (barring a small list of restricted items)
are allowed
through the normal banking channels. In case of capital account transactions, only the
transactions
which are explicitly enabled under the guidelines are allowed, remaining require
specific approvals
under FEMA.
Accordingly it is very important to understand the concept of Capital and Current
Account
Transactions to Comprehend FEMA.
A. Capital Account Transaction:
“Capital Account transaction” is defined under section 2(e) of FEMA as ‘a transaction
which
alters the assets or liabilities, including contingent liabilities, outside India of persons
resident in
India or assets or liabilities in India of persons resident outside India, and includes
transactions
referred to in sub-section (3) of section 6.’
Thus any transaction as a result of which the assets or liabilities outside India of a
person who is
resident in India and assets or liabilities in India of a person who is resident outside
India are
altered i.e. either increased or decreased, is a capital account transaction.
To put it in example, if a person resident in India acquires shares of a foreign company,
his/her
overseas assets will increase. Similarly, if the same person borrows from a non
resident through
External Commercial Borrowings (ECBs) his/her liability is created outside India.
Hence, both the
transactions lead to creation of asset or liability outside India of a person resident in
India. Both
the transactions are capital account transactions.
In case of a person resident outside India, if he acquires shares of an Indian company,
his/her
12
 
asset is created in India and if same person borrows from an institution in India for
acquiring
house in India, his/her liability will be created in India. Both these transactions lead to
creation
of asset or liability in India of a person resident outside India. Hence, both the
transactions are
capital account transactions.
The concept of Capital and Current Account transaction is to be seen from Balance of
Payment
point of view. If after the completion of transaction there remains any obligation to
either pay
or receive foreign exchange, the transaction would get colour of Capital Account
transaction.
For example, import of Plant &amp; Machinery is a current account transaction, as
upon import the
machinery is received in India and overseas supplier is say paid within six months from
import
and accordingly there is no future obligation on India as a country to honour foreign
exchange
obligation. In this example, from accounting perspective, though Plant &amp;
Machinery would be
capital goods, but for FEMA it would be a current account transaction.
RBI has been empowered under section 6(2) of FEMA to specify, in consultation with
the Central
Government, any class or classes of Capital Account transactions which are
permissible [i.e. over
and above the transactions permitted under section 6(3)]. Section 6(3) of FEMA
specifies the
classes of capital account transactions which are regulated by RBI. Every transaction
listed in this
section is regulated by a corresponding notification/regulation.
FEMA Notification No. 1/2000-RB dated 3-5-2000 contains the list of permissible
capital account
transactions as well as list of prohibited capital account transactions.
Prohibited Capital Account Transactions:
General Prohibition:
A person shall not undertake or sell or draw foreign exchange to or from an Authorized
person
for any capital account transactions other than those permitted in the Schedules,
provided the
transaction is within the limit.
Special Prohibition:
No person resident outside India shall make investment in India, in any form, in any
company or
partnership firm or proprietary concern or any entity, whether incorporated or not,
which is
engaged or proposes to engage-
 In the business of chit fund, or
 As nidhi company, or
 In agricultural or plantation activities, or
13
 
 In real estate business, or construction of farm houses, or
 In trading in Transferable Development Rights (TDRs)
(real estate shall not include development of townships, construction of
residential/commercial
premises, roads or bridges).
B. Current Account Transaction:
“Current account transaction” is defined under section 2(j) of FEMA to mean ‘a
transaction
other than a capital account transaction and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing
such transaction includes,-
(i) payments due in connection with foreign trade, other current business, services and
shortterm
banking and credit facilities in the ordinary course of business,
(ii) payments due as interest on loans and as net income from investments,
(iii) remittances for living expenses of parent, spouse and children residing abroad, and
(iv) expenses in connection with foreign travel, education and medical care of parents,
spouse
and children.’
All Current Account transactions are generally permitted unless specifically prohibited
whereas
all Capital Account transactions are generally prohibited unless specifically permitted.
Current Account transactions are divided into 3 schedules in Current Account
Transaction rules:
Schedule I – Prohibited Transactions
Schedule II – Transactions requiring prior approval of Government of India
Schedule III – Transactions requiring prior approval of RBI
EXAMPLES TO UNDERSTAND CAPITAL AND CURRENT ACCOUNT
TRANSACTIONS:
a. Import of Machinery on hire purchase:
In this transaction the person has created future obligation for making payment to
nonresident
and hence has liability towards the non-resident. Therefore the said transaction is a
capital account transaction.
b. Transaction representing creation or acquisition of wealth, shares, loans or
immovable
properties:
Since such types of transactions would lead to creation of assets in or outside India by
person resident outside or in India, as the case may be, the same are in nature of
capital
account transactions.
c. Remittances out of winnings from lottery:
This comes under Prohibited list (Schedule I) of the Current account transaction.
Hence
although the same is in nature of current account such transactions are prohibited.
However, an entity engaged in lottery business, imports any software or machinery to
be
utilized in lottery business in India, the same is a permissible transaction. Import of
software
or machinery will not result in violation of FEMA regulations in relation to current
account
14
 
transactions.
But any type of technical collaboration for lottery business including licensing for
franchise,
trademark, brand name, management contract or any contract for payment of royalty
as
such for such collaboration is prohibited under both current account transaction rules
and
also under FDI Policy. Hence, such transactions are not permissible.
d. Options premium payable under NASDAQ:
Options premium is the price paid by a person to buy an option contract, whether it is a
call
or put. So option premium is paid to acquire only specified rights for a contract. Under
option contract there is no future obligation in addition to option premium paid at the
time
of entering into contract so it does not result into creation of any contingent liability and
hence is a current account transaction. Whereas future contract would be a capital
account
transaction. Option contract may result into creation of contingent asset, and such
contingent asset is not covered in the definition of Capital Account transaction.
e. Opening a branch outside India:
Opening a branch outside India is a current account transaction as it does not result
into
alteration of any assets and liabilities overseas, since overseas branch would be
regarded as
Resident of India. If however, such overseas branch proposes to acquire immovable
property (say office premises) outside India, such acquisition would be regarded as
Capital
Account Transaction.
Opening a branch outside India is a permissible current account transaction and
regulated
by Notification No. 10/2000-RB dated 3-5-2000 dealing with Foreign Currency
accounts by a
person resident in India.
OTHER IMPORTANT SECTIONS – SEC 6(4) AND SEC 6(5):
Section 6(4):
A person resident in India may hold, own, transfer or invest in foreign currency, foreign
security or
any immovable property situated outside India if such currency, security or property
was acquired,
held or owned by such person when he was resident outside India or inherited from a
person who
was resident outside India.
However, there was no clarity on the type of transactions that would be covered under
section 6(4).
Hence, RBI with a view to resolve the doubts, vide its A. P. (DIR Series) Circular No.
90 dated January
9, 2014 clarified that the following transactions shall be covered under Section 6(4) of
FEMA, 1999:
a. Foreign currency accounts opened and maintained by such a person when he was
resident
15
 
outside India.
b. Income earned through employment or business or vocation outside India taken up
or
commenced, or from investments made, or from gift or inheritance received while such
a person
was resident outside India.
c. Foreign exchange including any income arising there from, and conversion or
replacement or
accrual to the same, held outside India acquired by way of inheritance from a person
resident
outside India.
d. A person resident in India may freely utilize all their eligible assets abroad as well as
income on
such assets or sale proceeds thereof received after their return to India for making any
payments or to make any fresh investments abroad without prior approval of RBI
Thus, section 6(4) gives liberty to a person resident in India to keep with him any
foreign currency or
foreign security or immovable property which he might have acquired when he was
resident outside
India, without any compliance and reporting under FEMA.
Section 6(5):
A person resident outside India may hold, own, transfer or invest in Indian currency,
security or any
immovable property situated in India if such currency, security or property was
acquired, held or
owned by such person when he was resident in India or inherited from a person who
was resident in
India.
This section allows a person resident outside India to keep with him any currency,
security or
immovable property which he might have acquired when he was resident in India. In
case if the
person liquidates his investment owned by him in India, he can keep the funds in his
NRO account.
RBI vide Notification 13 (Remittance of assets) allows to remit the balances of sales
proceeds of
assets held by NRI subject to the limit of USD 1 million per financial year.
THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE MANAGEMENT ACT, 1999
ACT NO. 42 OF 1999 [29th December, 1999.]
16
 
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to foreign exchange with the
objective of facilitating external trade and payments and for promoting the orderly
development and maintenance of foreign exchange market in India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
• PRELIMINARY
Short title, extent, application and commencement.
• This Act may be called the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999.
• It extends to the whole of India.
• It shall also apply to all branches, offices and agencies outside India owned or
controlled by a person resident in India and also to any contravention
thereunder committed outs ide India by any person to whom this Act applies .
• It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint: Provided that different dates may
be appointed for different provisions of this Act and any reference in any such
provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to
the coming into force of that provision.
Definitions
• Definitions.-In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- (a)
"Adjudicating Authority" means an officer authorized under sub-section (1) of
section 16
• "Appellate Tribunal" means the Appellate Tribunal for Foreign Exchange
established under section 18;
• "authorized person" means an authorized dealer, money changer, off-shore
banking unit or any other person for the time being authorized under subsection
(1) of section 10 to deal in foreign exchange or foreign securities;
• "Bench" means a Bench of the Appellate Tribunal;
• "capital account transaction" means a transaction which alters the assets or
liabilities, including contingent liabilities, outside India of persons resident in
India or assets or liabilities in India of persons resident outside India, and
includes t ansactions referred to in sub-section (3) of section 6;
• "Chairperson" means the Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal;
• "chartered accountant" shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause (b) of
sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Chartered Accounts Act, 1949 (38 of 1949);
• "currency" includes all currency notes, postal notes, postal orders, money
orders, cheques, drafts, travelers cheques, letters of credit, bills of exchange
and promissory notes, credit cards or such other similar instruments, as may be
notified by the Reserve Bank;
• "currency notes" means and includes cash in the form of coins and bank notes;
• "current account transaction" means a transaction other than a capital account
transaction and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing such
transaction includes,-
o payments due in connection with foreign trade, other current business,
services, and short-term banking and credit facilities in the ordinary
course of business,
o payments due as interest on loans and as net income from investments,
o remittances for living expenses of parents, spouse and children residing
abroad, and
o expenses in connection with foreign travel, education and medical care
17
 
of parents, spouse and children;
• "Director of Enforcement" means the Director of Enforcement appointed
under sub-section (1) of section 36;
o "export", with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions,
meanso
the taking out of India to a place outside India any goods,
o provision of services from India to any person outside India;
• "foreign currency" means any currency other than Indian currency;
• "foreign exchange" means foreign currency and includes,-
o deposits, credits and balances payable in any foreign currency
o drafts, travelers cheques, letters of credit or bills of exchange,
expressed or drawn in Indian currency but payable in any foreign
currency,
o drafts, travelers cheques, letters of credit or bills of exchange drawn by
banks, institutions or persons outside India, but payable in Indian
currency;
• "foreign security" means any security, in the form of shares, stocks, bonds,
debentures or any other instrument denominated or expressed in foreign
currency and includes securities expressed in foreign currency, but where
redemption or any form of re urn such as interest or dividends is payable in
Indian currency;
• "import", with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, means
bringing into India any goods or services;
• "Indian currency" means currency which is expressed or drawn in Indian
rupees but does not include special bank notes and special one rupee notes
issued under section 28A of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934);
• "legal practitioner" shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause (i) of subsection
(1) of section 2 of the Advocates Act, 1961 (25 of 1961);
• "Member" means a Member of the Appellate Tribunal and includes the
Chairperson thereof;
• "notify" means to notify in the Official Gazette and the expression
"notification" shall be construed accordingly;
• "person" includeso
an individual,
o a Hindu undivided family,
o a company,
o a firm,
o an association of persons or a body of individuals, whether
incorporated or not,
o every artificial juridical person, not falling within any of the preceding
sub-clauses, and
o any agency, office or branch owned or controlled by such person;
• "person resident in India" means- (i) a person residing in India for more than
one hundred and eighty-two days during the course of the preceding financial
year but does not includeo
a person who has gone out of India or who stays outside India, in either
case-
for or on taking up employment outside India, or
for carrying on outside India a business or vocation outside
India, or
for any other purpose, in such circumstances as would indicate
18
 
his intention to stay outside India for an uncertain period;
o a person who has come to or stays in India, in either case, otherwise
than-
for or on taking up employment in India, or
for carrying on in India a business or vocation in India, or
o (i) for any other purpose, in such circumstances as would indicate his
intention to stay in India for an uncertain period;
any person or body corporate registered or incorporated in
India
an office, branch or agency in India owned or controlled by a
person resident outside India,
an office, branch or agency outside India owned or controlled
by a person resident in India;
• "person resident outside India" means a person who is not resident in India;
• "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
• "repatriate to India" means bringing into India the realized foreign exchange
ando
the selling of such foreign exchange to an authorized person in India in
exchange for rupees, or
o the holding of realized amount in an account with an authorized person
in India to the extent notified by the Reserve Bank, and includes use of
the realized amount for discharge of a debt or liability denominated in
foreign exchange and the expression "repatriation" shall be construed
accordingly;
• "Reserve Bank" means the Reserve Bank of India constituted under subsection
(1) of section 3 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934);
o "security" means shares, stocks, bonds and debentures, Government
securities as defined in the Public Debt Act, 1944 (18 of 1944), savings
certificates to which the Government Savings Certificates Act, 1959
(46 of 1959) applies, deposit receipts in espect of deposits of securities
and units of the Unit Trust of India established under sub-section (1) of
section 3 of the Unit Trust of India Act, 1963 (52 of 1963) or of any
mutual fund and includes certificates of title to securities, but does not
in lude bills of exchange or promissory notes other than Government
promissory notes or any other instruments which may be notified by
the Reserve Bank as security for the purposes of this Act;
o "service" means service of any description which is made available to
potential users and includes the provision of facilities in connection
with banking, financing, insurance, medical assistance, legal
assistance, chit fund, real estate, transport, processing, supply of
electrical or other energy, boarding or lodging or both, entertainment,
amusement or the purveying of news or other information, but does not
include the rendering of any service free of charge or under a contract
of personal servic ;
o "Special Director (Appeals)" means an officer appointed under section
18;
o "specify" means to specify by regulations made under this Act and the
expression "specified" shall be construed accordingly;
o "transfer" includes sale, purchase, exchange, mortgage, pledge, gift,
loan or any other form of transfer of right, title, possession or lien.
CHAP
19
 
REGULATION AND MANAGEMENT OF FOREIGN EXCHANGE
CHAPTER II-REGULATION AND MANAGEMENT OF FOREIGN EXCHANGE
Dealing in foreign exchange, etc.
Dealing in foreign exchange, etc.-Save as otherwise provided in this Act, rules or
regulations made thereunder, or with the general or special permission of the Reserve
Bank, no person shall-
• deal in or transfer any foreign exchange or foreign security to any person not
being an authorized person;
• make any payment to or for the credit of any person resident outside India in
any manner;
• receive otherwise through an authorized person, any payment by order or on
behalf of any person resident outside India in any manner. Explanation.-For
the purpose of this clause, where any person in, or resident in, India receives
any payment by order or on behalf of any person resident outside India
through any other person (including an authorized person) without a
corresponding inwa d remittance from any place outside India, then, such
person shall be deemed to have received such payment otherwise than through
an authorized person;
• enter into any financial transaction in India as consideration for or in
association with acquisition or creation or transfer of a right to acquire, any
asset outside India by any person. Explanation.-For the purpose of this clause,
"financial transaction" means making any payment to, or for the credit of any
person, or receiving any payment for, by order or on behalf of any person, or
drawing, issuing or negotiating any bill of exchange r promissory note, or
transferring any security or acknowledging any debt.
Holding of foreign exchange, etc.
Holding of foreign exchange, etc.-Save as otherwise provided in this Act, no person
resident in India shall acquire, hold, own, possess or transfer any foreign exchange,
foreign security or any immovable property situated outside India.
Current account transactions.
Current account transactions.-Any person may sell or draw foreign exchange to or
from an authorized person if such sale or drawal is a current account transaction:
Provided that the Central Government may, in public interest and in consultation with
the Reserve Bank, impose such reasonable restrictions for current account
transactions as may be prescribed
Capital account transactions.
• Capital account transactions. -(1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2),
any person may sell or draw foreign exchange to or from an authorized person
for a capital account transaction.
• The Reserve Bank may, in consultation with the Central Government, specifyo
any class or classes of capital account transactions which are
permissible;
o the limit up to which foreign exchange shall be admissible for such
transactions: Provided that the Reserve Bank shall not impose any
restriction on the drawal of foreign exchange for payments due on
account of amortization of loans or for depreciation of direct
investments in the ordinary courts of business.
• Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (2), the
Reserve Bank may, by regulations, prohibit, restrict or regulate the followingo
transfer or issue of any foreign security by a person resident in India;
o transfer or issue of any security by a person resident outside India;
20
 
o transfer or issue of any security or foreign security by any branch,
office or agency in India of a person resident outside India;
o any borrowing or lending in rupees in whatever form or by whatever
name called;
o any borrowing or lending in rupees in whatever form or by whatever
name called between a person resident in India and a person resident
outside India;
o deposits between persons resident in India and persons resident outside
India;
o export, import or holding of currency or currency notes;
o transfer of immovable property outside India, other than a lease not
exceeding five years, by a person resident in India;
o acquisition or transfer of immovable property in India, other than a
lease not exceeding five years, by a person resident outside India;
o giving of a guarantee or surety in respect of any debt, obligation or
other liability incurred-
by a person resident in India and owed to a person resident
outside India; or
by a person resident outside India.
• A person resident in India may hold, own, transfer or invest in foreign
currency, foreign security or any immovable property situated outside India if
such currency, security or property was acquired, held or owned by such
person when he was resident outside India or inherited from a person who was
resident outside India.
• A person resident outside India may hold, own, transfer or invest in Indian
currency, security or any immovable property situated in India if such
currency, security or property was acquired, held or owned by such person
when he was resident in India or inherited from a person who was resident in
India.
• A person resident outside India may hold, own, transfer or invest in Indian
currency, security or any immovable property situated in India if such
currency, security or property was acquired, held or owned by such person
when he was resident in India or inherited from a person who was resident in
India.
Export of goods and services.
• Every exporter of goods shallo
furnish to the Reserve Bank or to such other authority a declaration in
such form and in such manner as may be specified, containing true and
correct material particulars, including the amount representing the full
export value or, if the full export value of the goods is not ascertainable
at the time of export, the value which the exporter, having regard to the
prevailing market conditions, expects to receive on the sale of the
goods in a market outside India;
o furnish to the Reserve Bank such other information as may be required
by the Reserve Bank for the purpose of ensuring the realization of the
export proceeds by such exporter.
• The Reserve Bank may, for he purpose of ensuring that the full export value of
the goods or such reduced value of the goods as the Reserve Bank determines,
having regard to the prevailing market conditions, is received without any
delay, direct any e porter to comply with such requirements as it deems fit.
• Every exporter of services shall furnish to the Reserve Bank or to such other
21
 
authorities a declaration in such form and in such manner as may be specified,
containing the true and correct material particulars in relation to payment for
such services
Realisation and repatriation of foreign exchange.
Realisation and repatriation of foreign exchange.-Save as otherwise provided in this
Act, where any amount of foreign exchange is due or has accrued to any person
resident in India, such person shall take all reasonable steps to realize and repatriate
to
India such foreign exchange within such period and in such manner as may be
specified by the Reserve Bank.
Exemption from realization and repatriation in certain cases.
Exemption from realization and repatriation in certain cases. -The provisions of
sections 4 and 8 shall not apply to the following, namely:-
• possession of foreign currency or foreign coins by any person up to such limit
as the Reserve Bank may specify;
• foreign currency account held or operated by such person or class of persons
and the limit up to which the Reserve Bank may specify;
• foreign exchange acquired or received before the 8th day of July, 1947 or any
income arising or accruing thereon which is he ld outside India by any person
in pursuance of a general or spec ial permission granted by the Reserve Bank;
• foreign exchange held by a person resident in India up to su ch limit as the
Reserve Bank may specify, if such foreign exchan ge was acquired by way of
gift or inheritance from a person refe rred to in clause (c), including any
income arising therefrom;
• foreign exchange acquired from employment, business, trade, vocation,
services, honorarium, gifts, inheritance or any other legitimate means up to
such limit as the Reserve Bank may specif y; and
• such other receipts in foreign exchange as the Reserve Bank may specify.
CHAP
AUTHORISED PERSON
CHAPTER III- AUTHORISED PERSON
Authorised person.
• The Reserve Bank may, on an application made to it in this behalf, authorize
any person to be known as authorized person to deal in foreign exchange or in
foreign securities, as an authorized dealer, money changer or off-shore anking
unit or in any other manner as it deems fit.
• An authorization under this section shall be in writing and shall be subject to
the conditions laid down therein.
• An authorization granted under sub-section (1) may be revoked by the Reserve
Bank at any time if the Reserve Bank is satisfied thato
it is in public interest so to do; or
o the authorized person has failed to comply with the condition subject
to which the authorization was granted or has contravened any of the
provisions of the Act or any rule, regulation, notification, direction or
order made thereunder:
Provided that no such authorization shall be revoked on any
ground referred to in clause (b) unless the authorized person
has been given a reasonable opportunity of making a
representation in the matter.
• An authorized person shall, in all his dealings in foreign exchange or foreign
security, comply with such general or special directions or orders as the
22
 
Reserve Bank may, from time to time, think fit to give, and, except with the
previous permission f the Reserve Bank, an authorized person shall not engage
in any transaction involving any foreign exchange or foreign security which is
not in conformity with the terms of his authorization under this section.
• An authorized person shall, before undertaking any transaction in foreign
exchange on behalf of any person, require that person to make such
declaration and to give such information as will reasonably satisfy him that the
transaction will not involve and is not designed for the purpose of any
contravention or evasion of the provisions of this Act or of any rule,
regulation, notification, direction or order made thereunder, and where the said
person refuses to comply with any such requirement or make only
unsatisfactory compliance therewith, the authorized person shall refuse in
writing to undertake the transaction and shall, if he has reason to believe that
any such contravention or evasion as aforesaid is contemplated by the person,
report the mat er to the Reserve Bank.
• Any person, other than an authorized person, who has acquired or purchased
foreign exchange for any purpose mentioned in the declaration made by him to
authorized person under sub-section (5) does not use it for such purpose or
does not surrender it o authorized person within the specified period or uses
the foreign exchange so acquired or purchased for any other purpose for which
purchase or acquisition or foreign exchange is not permissible under the
provisions of the Act or the rules or regulatio s or direction or order made
thereunder shall be deemed to have committed contravention of the provisions
of the Act for the purpose of this section.
Reserve Bank's powers to issue directions to authorized person.
• Reverve Bank's powers to issue directions to authorized person.-(1) The
Reserve Bank may, for the purpose of securing compliance with the provisions
of this Act and of any rules, regulations, notifications or directions made
thereunder, give to the a thorized persons any direction in regard to making of
payment or the doing or desist from doing any act relating to foreign exchange
or foreign security.
• The Reserve Bank may, for the purpose of ensuring the compliance with the
provisions of this Act or of any rule, regulation, notification, direction or order
made thereunder, direct any authorized person to furnish such information, in
such manner, a it deems fit.
• Where any authorized person contravenes any direction given by the Reserve
Bank under this Act or fails to file any return as directed by the Reserve Bank,
the Reserve Bank may, after giving person a penalty which may extend to ten
thousand rupees and in the case of continuing contravention with an additional
penalty which may extend to two thousand rupees for every day during which
such contravention continues. reasonable opportunity of being heard, impose
on the author sed
Power of Reserve Bank to inspect authorised person.
• The Reserve Bank may, at any time, cause an inspection to be made, by any
officer of the Reserve Bank specially authorised in writing by the Reserve
Bank in this behalf, of the business of any a thorised person as may appear to
it to be necessary or expedient for the purpose ofo
verifying the correctness of any statement, information or particulars
furnished to the Reserve Bank;
o obtaining any information or particulars which such authorised person
has failed to furnish on being called upon to do so;
23
 
o securing compliance with the provisions of this Act or of any rules,
regulations, directions or orders made thereunder.
• It shall be the duty of every authorised person, and where such person is a
company or a firm, every director, partner or other officer of such company or
firm, as the case may be, to produce to any officer making an inspection under
sub-section (1), such books, accounts and other documents in his custody or
power and to furnish any statement or information relating to the affairs of
such person, company or firm as the said officer may require within such time
and in such manner as the said officer m y direct.
CONTRAVENTION AND PENALTIES
CHAPTER IV-CONTRAVENTION AND PENALTIES
Penalties
• If any person contravenes any provision of this Act, or contravenes any rule,
regulation, notification, direction or order issued in exercise of the powers
under this Act, or contravenes any condition subject to which an authorization
s issued by the Reserve Bank, he shall, upon adjudication, be liable to a
penalty up to thrice the sum involved in such contravention where such
amount is quantifiable, or up to two lakh rupees where the amount is not
quantifiable, and where such contrav ntion is a continying one, further penalty
which may extend to five thousand rupees for every day after the first day
during which the contravention continues.
• Any Adjudicating Authority adjudging any contravention under sub-section
(1), may, if he thinks fit in addition to any penalty which he may impose for
such contravention direct that any currency, security or any other money or
property in respect of hich the contravention has taken place shall be
confiscated to the Central Government and further direct that the foreign
exchange holdings, if any, of the persons committing the contraventions or
any part thereof, shall be brought back into India or sha l be retained outside
India in accordance with the directions made in this behalf. Explanation.-For
the purposes of this sub-section, "property" in respect of which contravention
has taken place, shall includeo
deposits in a bank, where the said property is converted into such
deposits;
o Indian currency, where the said property is converted into that
currency; and
o any other property which has resulted out of the conversion of that
property.
Enforcement of te orders of Adjudicating Authority.
• Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 19, if any person fails to
make full payment of the penalty imposed on him under section 13 within a
period of ninety days from the date n which the notice for payment of such
penalty is served on him, he shall be liable to civil imprisonment under this
section.
• No order for the arrest and detention in civil prison of a defaulter shall be
made unless the Adjudication Authority has issued and served a notice upon
the defaulter calling upon him to appear before him on the date specified in the
notice and to sh w cause why he should not be committed to the civil prison,
24
 
and unless the Adjudicating Authority, for reasons in writing, is satisfiedo
that the defaulter, with the object or effect of obstructing the recovery
of penalty, has after the issue of notice by the Adjudicating Authority,
dishonestly transferred, concealed, or removed any part of his property,
or
o that the defaulter has, or has had since the issuing of notice by the
Adjudicating Authority, the means to pay the arrears or some
substantial part thereof and refuses or neglects or has refused or
neglected to pay the same.
• Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), a warrant for the arrest
of the defaulter may be issued by the Adjudicating Authority if the
Adjudicating Authority is satisfied, by affidavit or otherwise, that with the
object or effect of dela ing the execution of the certificate the defaulter is
likely to abscond or leave the local limits of the jurisdiction of the
Adjudicating Authority.
• Where appearance is not made pursuant to a notice issued and served under
sub-section (1), the Adjudicating Authority may issue a warrant for the arrest
of the defaulter.
• A warrant of arrest issued by the Adjudicating Authority under sub-section (3)
or sub-section (4) may also be executed by any other Adjudicating Authority
within whose jurisdiction the defaulter may for the time being be found.
• Every person arrested in pursuance of a warrant of arrest under this section
shall be brought before the Adjudicating Authority issuing the warrant as soon
as practicable and in any event within twenty-four hours of his arrest
(exclusive of the time equired for the journey): Provided that, if the defaulter
pays the amount entered in the warrant of arrest as due and the costs of the
arrest to the officer arresting him, such officer shall at once release him.
Explanation.-For the purposes of this sub-section, where the defaulter is a
Hindu undivided family, the karta thereof shall be deemed to be the defaulter.
• When a defaulter appears before the Adjudicating Authority pursuant to a
notice to show cause or is brought before the Adjudicating Authority under
this section, the Adjudicating Authority shall give the defaulter an opportunity
showing cause why he hould not be committed to the civil prison.
• Pending the conclusion of the inquiry, the Adjudicating Authority may, in his
discretion, order the defaulter to be detained in the custody of such officer as
the Adjudicating Authority may think fit or release him on his furnishing the
security to t e satisfaction of the Adjudicating Authority for his appearance as
and when required.
• Upon the conclusion of the inquiry, the Adjudicating authority may make an
order for the detention of the defaulter in the civil prison and shall in that
event cause him to be arrested if he is not already under arrest: Provide that in
order to give a defaulter an opportunity of satisfying the arrears, the
Adjudicating Authority may, before making the order of detention, leave the
defaulter in the custody of the officer arresting him or of any other officer for
a specif ed period not exceeding fifteen days, or release him on his furnishing
security to the satisfaction of the Adjudicating Authority for his appearance at
the expiration of the specified period if the arrears are not satisfied.
• When the Adjudicating Authority does not make an order of detention under
sub-section (9), he shall, if the defaulter is under arrest, direct his release.
• Every person detained in the civil prison in execution of the certificate may be
so detained,-
25
 
o where the certificate is for a demand of an amount exceeding rupees
one crore, up to three years, and
o in any other case, up to six months: Provided that he shall be released
from such detention on the amount mentioned in the warrant for his
detention being paid to the officer-in-charge of the civil prison.
• A defaulter released from detention under this section shall not, merely by
reason of his release, be discharged from his liability for the arrears, but he
shall not be liable to be arrested under the certificate in execution of which he
was detaine in the civil prison.
• A detention order may be executed at any place in India in the manner
provided for the execution of warrant of arrest under the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).
Power to compound contravention.
• Any contravention under section 13 may, on an application made by the
person committing such contravention, be compounded within one hundred
and eighty days from the date of receipt of application by the Director f
Enforcement or such other officers of the Directorate of Enforcement and
officers of the Reserve Bank as may be authorised in this behalf by the Central
Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
• Where a contravention has been compounded under sub-section (1), no
proceeding or further proceeding, as the case may be, shall be initiated or
continued, as the case may be, against the person committing such
contravention under that section, in re pect of the contravention so
compounded.
ADJUDICATION AND APPEAL
CHAPTER V- ADJUDICATION AND APPEAL
Appointment of Adjudicating Authority.
• For the purpose of adjudication under section 13, the Central Government
may, by an order published in the Official Gazette, appoint as many officers of
the Central Government as it may think fit, as the Adj dicating Authorities for
holding an inquiry in the manner prescribed after giving the person alleged to
have committed contravention under section 13, against whom a complaint
has been made under sub-section (3) (hereinafter in this section referred to a
the said person) a reasonable opportunity of being heard for the purpose of
imposing any penalty: Provided that where the Adjudicating Authority is of
opinion that the said person is likely to abscond or is likely to evade in any
manner, the payment of penalty, if levied, it may direct the said person to
furnish a bond or guarantee for such amount an subject to such conditions as it
may deem fit.
• The Central Government shall, while appointing the Adjudicating Authorities
under sub-section (1), also specify in the order published in the Official
Gazette, their respective jurisdictions.
• No Adjudicating Authority shall hold an enquiry under sub-section (1) except
upon a complaint in writing made by any officer authorised by a general or
26
 
special order by the Central Government.
• The said person may appear either in person or take the assistance of a legal
practitioner or a chartered accountant of his choice for presenting his case
before the Adjudicating Authority.
• Every Adjudicating Authority shall have the same powers of a civil court
which are conferred on the Appellate Tribunal under sub-section (2) of section
28 ando
all proceedings before it shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings
within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code
(45 of 1860);
o shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of sections 345 and
346 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).
• Every Adjudicating Authority shall deal with the complaint under sub-section
(2) as expeditiously as possible and endeavor shall be made to dispose of the
complaint finally within one year from the date of receipt of the complaint:
Provided that where the complaint cannot be disposed of within the said
period, the Adjudicating Authority shall record periodically the reasons in
writing for not disposing of the complaint within the said period.
Appeal to Special Director (Appeals).
• The Central Government shall, by notification, appoint one or more Special
Directors (Appeals) to hear appeals against the orders of the Adjudicating
Authorities under this section and shall also specify in t e said notification the
matter and places in relation to which the Special Director (Appeals) may
exercise jurisdiction.
• Any person aggrieved by an order made by the Adjudicating Authority, being
an Assistant Director of Enforcement or a Deputy Director of Enforcement,
may prefer an appeal to the Special Director (Appeals).
• Every appeal under sub-section (1) shall be filed within forty-five days from
the date on which the copy of the order made by the Adjudicating Authority is
received by the aggrieved person and it shall be in such form, verified in such
manner and be ccompanied by such fee as may be prescribed: Provided that
the Special Director (Appeals) may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the
said period of forty-five days, if he is satisfied that there was sufficient cause
for not filing it within that period.
• On receipt of an appeal under sub-section (1), the Special Director (Appeals)
may after giving the parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, pass
such order thereon as he thinks fit, confirming, modifying or setting aside the
order appeale against.
• The Special Director (Appeals) shall send a copy of every order made by him
to the parties to appeal and to the concerned Adjudicating Authority.
• The Special Director (Appeals) shall have the same powers of a civil court
which are conferred on the Appellate Tribunal under sub-section (2) of section
28 ando
all proceedings before him shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings
within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code
(45 of 1860);
o shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of sections 345 and
346 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).
Establishment of Appellate Tribunal.
Establishment of Appellate Tribunal.-The Central Government shall, by notification,
establish an Appellate Tribunal to be known as the Appellate Tribunal for Foreign
27
 
Exchange to hear appeals against the orders of the Adjudicating Authorities and the
pecial Director (Appeals) under this Act.
Appeal to Appellate Tribunal.
• Save as provided in sub-section (2), the Central Government or any person
aggrieved by an order made by an Adjudicating Authority, other than those
referred to in sub-section (1) of section 17, or the Special Directo (Appeals),
may prefer an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal: Provided that any person
appealing against the order of the Adjudicating Authority or the Special
Director (Appeals) levying any penalty, shall while filing the appeal, deposit
the amount of such penalty with such authority as may be notified by the Cent
al Government:
Provided further that where in any particular case, the Appellate Tribunal is of
the opinion that the deposit of such penalty would cause undue hardship to
such person, the Appellate Tribunal may dispense with such deposit subject to
such conditions as i may deem fit to impose so as to safeguard the realisation
of penalty.
• Every appeal under sub-section (1) shall be filed within a period of forty-five
days from the date on which a copy of the order made by the Adjudicating
Authority or the Special Director (Appeals) is received by the aggrieved
person or by the Central Government and it shall be in such form, verified in
such manner and be accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed : Provided
that the Appellate Tribunal may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said
period of forty-five days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not
filing it within that period.
• On receipt of an appeal under sub-section (1), the Appellate Tribunal may,
after giving the parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, pass such
orders thereon as it thinks fit, confirming, modifying or setting aside the order
appealed agai st.
• The Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of every order made by it to the
parties to the appeal and to the concerned Adjudicating Authority or the
Special Director (Appeals), as the case may be.
• The appeal filed before the Appellate Tribunal under sub-section (1) shall be
dealt with by it as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be made by it
to dispose of the appeal finally within one hundred and eighty days from the
date of receipt of the appeal: Provided that where any appeal could not be
disposed of within the said period of one hundred and eighty days, the
Appellate Tribunal shall record its reasons in writing for not disposing off the
appeal within the said period.
• The Appellate Tribunal may, for the purpose of examining the legality,
propriety or correctness of any order made by the Adjudicating Authority
under section 16 in relation to any proceeding, on its own motion or otherwise,
call for the records of su h proceedings and make such order in the case as it
thinks fit.
Composition of Appellate Tribunal.
• The Appellate Tribunal shall consist of a Chairperson and such number of
Members as the Central Government may deem fit.
• Subject to the provisions of this Act,-]
o the jurisdiction of the Appellate Tribunal may be exercised by Benches
thereof;
o a Bench may be constituted by the Chairperson with one or more
Members as the Chairperson may deem fit;
28
 
o the Benches of the Appellate Tribunal shall ordinarily sit at New Delhi
and at such other places as the Central Government may, in
consultation with the Chairperson, notify;
o the Central Government shall notify the areas in relation to which each
Bench of the Appellate Tribunal may exercise jurisdiction
• Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), the Chairperson may
transfer a Member from one Bench to another Bench.
• If at any stage of the hearing of any case or matter it appears to the
Chairperson or a Member that the case or matter is of such a nature that it
ought to be heard by a Bench consisting of two Members, the case or matter
may be transferred by the Ch irperson or, as the case may be, referred to him
for transfer, to such Bench as the Chairperson may deem fit.
Qualifications for appointment of Chairperson, Member andSpecial Director
(Appeals).
• A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the Chairperson or a
Member unless heo
in the case of Chairperson, is or has been, or is qualified to be, a Judge
of a High Court; and
o in the case of a Member, is or has been, or is qualified to be, a District
Judge.
• A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Special Director
(Appeals) unless heo
has been a member of the Indian Legal Service and has held a post in
Grade I of that Service; or
o has been a member of the Indian Revenue Service and has held a post
equivalent to a Joint Secretary to the Government of India.
Term of Office.
The Chairperson and every other Member shall hold office as such for a term of five
years from the date on which he enters upon his office: Provided that no Chairperson
or other Member shall hold office as such after he has attained,-
• in the case of the Chairperson, the age of sixty-five years;
• in the case of any other Member, the age of sixty-two years.
Term and Conditions of service.
The salary and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of service of
the Chairperson, other Members and the Special Director (Appeals) shall be such as
may be prescribed:
Provided that neither the salary and allowances nor the other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson or a Member shall be varied to his disadvantage after
appointment.
Vacancies.
-If, for reason other than temporary absence, any vacancy occurs in the office of the
Chairperson or a Member, the Central Government shall appoint another person in
accordance with the provisions of this Act to fill the vacancy and the pro eedings may
be continued before the Appellate Tribunal from the stage at which the vacancy is
filled.
Resignation and removal.
• The Chairperson or a Member may, by notice in writing under his hand
addressed to the Central Government, resign his office:Provided that the
Chairperson or a Member shall, unless he is permitted by the Central
Government to relinquish his office sooner, continue to hold office until the
expiry of three months from the date of receipt of such notice or until a person
29
 
duly app inted as his successor enters upon his office or until the expiry of
term of office, whichever is the earliest.
• The Chairperson or a Member shall not be removed from his office except by
an order by the Central Government on the ground of proved misbehaviour or
incapacity after an inquiry made by such person as the President may appoint
for this purpose in whi h the Chairperson or a Member concerned has been
informed of the charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity of
being heard in respect of such charges.
Member to act as Chairperson in certain circumstances.
• In the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the Chairperson
by reason of his death, resignation or otherwise, the senior-most Member shall
act as the Chairperson until the ate on which a new Chairperson, appointed in
accordance with the provisions of this Act to fill such vacancy, enters upon his
office.
• When the Chairperson is unable to discharge his functions owing to absence,
illness or any other cause, the senior-most Member shall discharge the
functions of the Chairperson until the date on which the Chairperson resumes
his duties.
Staff of Appellate Tribunal and Special Director (Appeals).
• The Central Government shall provide the Appellate Tribunal and the Special
Director (Appeals) with such officers and employees as it may deem fit.
• The officers and employees of the Appellate Tribunal and office of the Special
Director (Appeals) shall discharge their functions under the general
superintendence of the Chairperson and the Special Director (Appeals), as the
case may be.
• The salaries and allowances and other conditions of service of the officers and
employees of the Appellate Tribunal and office of the Special Director
(Appeals) shall be such as may be prescribed.
Procedure and powers of Appellate Tribunal and Special Director(Appeals).
• The Appellate Tribunal and the Special Director (Appeals) shall not be bound
by the procedure laid down by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908),
but shall be guid d by the principles of natural justice and, subject to the other
provisions of this Act, the Appellate Tribunal and the Special Director
(Appeals) shall have powers to regulate its own procedure.
• The Appellate Tribunal and the Special Director (Appeals) shall have, for the
purposes of discharging its functions under this Act, the same powers as are
vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908)
while trying a suit in respect of the following matters, namely:-
o summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining
him on oath;
o requiring the discovery and production of documents;
o receiving evidence on affidavits;
o subject to the provisions of sections 123 and 124 of the Indian
Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), requisitioning any public record or
document or copy of such record or document from any office;
o issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents;
o reviewing its decisions;
o dismissing a representation of default or deciding it ex parte;
o setting aside any order of dismissal of any representation for default or
any order passed by it ex parte; and
o any other matter which may be prescribed by the Central Government.
30
 
• An order made by the Appellate Tribunal or the Special Director (Appeals)
under this Act shall be executable by the Appellate Tribunal or the Special
Director (Appeals) as a decree of civil court and, for this purpose, the
Appellate Tribunal and the pecial Director (Appeals) shall have all the powers
of a civil court.
• Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3), the Appellate Tribunal
or the Special Director (Appeals) may transmit any order made by it to a civil
court having local jurisdiction and such civil court shall execute the order as if
it were a ecree made by that court.
• All proceedings before the Appellate Tribunal and the Special Director
(Appeals) shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings within the meaning of
sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) and the Appellate
Tribunal shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of sections 345
and 346 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).
Distribution of business amongst Benches.
Distribution of business amongst Benches.-Where Benches are constituted, the
Chairperson may, from time to time, by notification, make provisions as to the
distribution of the business of the Appellate Tribunal amongst the Benches and also
provide fo the matters which may be dealt with by each Bench.
Power of Chairperson to transfer cases.
Power of Chairperson to transfer cases.-On the application of any of the parties and
after notice to the parties, and after hearing such of them as he may desire to be heard,
or on his own motion without such notice, the Chairperson may transfer any ase
pending before one Bench, for disposal, to any other Bench.
Decision to be by majority.
Decision to be by majority.-If the Members of a Bench consisting of two Members
differ in opinion on any point, they shall state the point or points on which they differ,
and make a reference to the Chairperson who shall either hear the point or poi ts
himself or refer the case for hearing on such point or points by one or more of the
other Members of the Appellate Tribunal and such point or points shall be decided
according to the opinion of the majority of the Members of the Appellate Tribunal
who have heard the case, including those who first heard it.
Right of appellant to take assistance of legal practitioner orchartered accountant and
of Government, to appoint presentingofficers.
Right of appellant to take assistance of legal practitioner or chartered accountant and
of Government, to appoint presenting officers.-
• A person preferring an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal or the Special Director
(Appeals) under this Act may ei her appear in person or take the assistance of
a legal practitioner or a chartered accountant of his choice to present his case
before the Appellate Tribunal or the Special Director (Appeals), as the case
may be.
• The Central Government may authorise one or more legal practitioners or
chartered accountants or any of its officers to act as presenting officers and
every person so authorised may present the case with respect to any appeal
before the Appellate Tri unal or the Special Director (Appeals), as the case
may be.
Members, etc., to be public servants.
Members, etc., to be public servants.-The Chairperson, Members and other officers
and employees of the Appellate Tribunal, the Special Director (Appeals) and the
Ajudicating Authority shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of
secti n 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).
31
 
Civil court not to have jurisdiction.
Civil court not to have jurisdiction.-No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain
any suit or proceeding in respect of any matter which an Adjudicating Authority or
the Appellate der this Act to determine and no injunction shall be granted by any
court or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of
any power conferred by or under this Act. Tribunal or the Special Director (Appeals)
is empowered by or u
Appeal to High Court.
Appeal to High Court.-Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the
Appellate Tribunal may file an appeal to the High Court within sixty days from the
date of communication of the decision or order of the Appellate Tribunal to him on
any quest on of law arising out of such order:
Provided that the High Court may, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by
sufficient cause from filing the appeal within the said period, allow it to be filed
within a further period not exceeding sixty days.
Explanation.-In this section "High Court" means-
• the High Court within the jurisdiction of which the aggrieved party ordinarily
resides or carries on business or personally works for gain; and
• where the Central Government is the aggrieved party, the High Court within
the jurisdiction of which the respondent, or in a case where there are more
than one respondent, any of the respondents, ordinarily resides or carries on
business or personall works for gain.
DIRECTORATE OF ENFORCEMENT
CHAPTER VI-DIRECTORATE OF ENFORCMENT
Directorate of Enforcement.
• The Central Government shall establish a Directorate of Enforcement with a
Director and such other officers or class of officers as it thinks fit, who shall
be called officers of Enforcement, for the purposes of this A t.
• Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), the Central
Government may authorise the Director of Enforcement or an Additional
Director of Enforcement or a Special Director of Enforcement or a Deputy
Director of Enforcement to appoint offi ers of Enforcement below the rank of
an Assistant Director of Enforcement.
• Subject to such conditions and limitations as the Central Government may
impose, an officer of Enforcement may exercise the powers and discharge the
duties conferred or imposed on him under this Act.
Power of search, seizure, etc.
• The Director of Enforcement and other officers of Enforcement, not below the
rank of an Assistant Director, shall take up for investigation the contravention
referred to in section 13.
• Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), the Central
Government may also, by notification, authorise any officer or class of
32
 
officers in the Central Government, State Government or the Reserve Bank,
not below the rank of an Under Secre ary to the Government of India to
investigate any contravention referred to in section 13.
• The officers referred to in sub-section (1) shall exercise the like powers which
are conferred on income-tax authorities under the Income-tax Act, 1961 (43 of
1961) and shall exercise such powers, subject to such limitations laid down
under that A t.
Empowering other officers.
• The Central Government may, by order and subject to such conditions and
limitations as it thinks fit to impose, authorise any officer of customs or any
central excise officer or any police officer or any other officer o the Central
Government or a State Government to exercise such of the powers and
discharge such of the duties of the Director of Enforcement or any other
officer of Enforcement under this Act as may be stated in the order.
• The officers referred to in sub-section (1) shall exercise the like powers which
are conferred on the income-tax authorities under the Income-tax Act, 1961
(43 of 1961), subject to such conditions and limitations as the Central
Government may impose.
MISCELLANEOUS
CHAPTER VII-MISCELLANEOUS
Presumption as to documents in certain cases.
Presumption as to documents in certain cases.-Where any document-
• is produced or furnished by any person or has been seized from the custody or
control of any person, in either case, under this Act or under any other law; or
• has been received from any place outside India (duly authenticated by such
authority or person and in such manner as may be prescribed) in the course of
investigation of any contravention under this Act alleged to have been
committed by any person, and such document is tendered in any proceeding
under this Act in evidence against him, or against him and any other person
who is proceeded against jointly with him, the court or the Adjudicating
Authority, as the case may be, shallo
presume, unless the contrary is proved, that the signature and every
other part of such document which purports to be in the handwriting of
any particular person or which the court may reasonably assume to
have been signed by, or to be in the handwri ing of, any particular
person, is in that person's handwriting, and in the case of a document
executed or attested, that it was executed or attested by the person by
whom it purports to have been so executed or attested;
o admit the document in evidence notwithstanding that it is not duly
stamped, if such document is otherwise admissible in evidence;
o in a case falling under clause (i), also presume, unless the contrary is
proved, the truth of the contents of such document.
Suspension of operation of this Act.
• If the Central Government is satisfied that circumstances have arisen rendering
it necessary that any permission granted or restriction imposed by this Act
should cease to be granted or imposed, or if it consi ers necessary or expedient
33
 
so to do in public interest, the Central Government may, by notification,
suspend or relax to such extent either indefinitely or for such period as may be
notified, the operation of all or any of the provisions of this Act.
• Where the operation of any provision of this Act has under sub-section (1)
been suspended or relaxed indefinitely, such suspension or relaxation may, at
any time while this Act remains in force, be removed by the Central
Government by notification.
• Every notification issued under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be
after it is issued, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a
total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or
more succe sive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree
in making any modification in the notification or both Houses agree that the
notification should not be issu d, the notification shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice
to the validity of anything previously done under that not fication.
Power of Central Government to give directions.
Power of Central Government to give directions.-For the purposes of this Act, the
Central Government may, from time to time, give to the Reserve Bank such general or
special directions as it thinks fit, and the Reserve Bank shall, in the discharge of its
functions under this Act, comply with any such directions.
Contravention by companies.
• Where a person committing a contravention of any of the provisions of this
Act or of any rule, direction or order made thereunder is a company, every
person who, at the time the contravention was committed, was in char e of,
and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the
company as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the
contravention and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly: Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render
any such person liable to punishment if he proves that the contravention took
place without his knowledge or that he exercised due diligence to prevent such
contravention.
• Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where a contravention
of any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule, direction or order made
thereunder has been committed by a company and it is proved that the
contravention has taken pla e with the consent or connivance of, or is
attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or
other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer
shall also be deemed to be guilty of the contraven ion and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly.Explanation.-For the purposes of
this section-(i) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm or
other association of individuals; and
(ii) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
Death or insolvency in certain cases.
Death or insolvency in certain cases.-Any right, obligation, liability, proceeding or
appeal arising in relation to the provisions of section 13 shall not abate by reason of
death or insolvency of the person liable under that section and upon such de th or
insolvency such rights and obligations shall devolve on the legal representative of
such person or the official receiver or the official assignee, as the case may be:
Provided that a legal representative of the deceased shall be liable only to the extent
34
 
of the inheritance or estate of the deceased.
Bar of legal proceedings.
Bar of legal proceedings.-No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie
against the Central Government or the Reserve Bank or any officer of that
Government or of the Reserve Bank or any other person exercising any power or
discharging any functions or performing any duties under this Act, for anything in
good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or any rule, regulation,
notification, direction or order made thereunder.
Removal of difficulties.
• If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order, do anything not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act for the purpose of removing the difficulty: Provided that no such
order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years from the
commencement of this Act.
• Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament.
Power to make rules.
The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to carry out the provisions
of this Act. (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules
may provide for,-
• the imposition of reasonable restrictions on current account transactions under
section 5;
• the manner in which the contravention may be compounded under sub-section
(1) of section 15;
• the manner of holding an inquiry by the Adjudicating Authority under subsection
(1) of section 16;
• the form of appeal and fee for filing such appeal under sections 17 and 19;
• the salary and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson and other Members of the Appellate Tribunal and
the Special Director (Appeals) under section 23;
• the salaries and allowances and other conditions of service of the officers and
employees of the Appellate Tribunal and the office of the Special Director
(Appeals) under sub-section (3) of section 27;
• the additional matters in respect of which the Appellate Tribunal and the
Special Director (Appeals) may exercise the powers of a civil court under
clause (i) of sub-section (2) of section 28;
• the authority or person and the manner in which any document may be
authenticated under clause (ii) of section 39; and
• any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.
Power to make regulations.
• The Reserve Bank may, by notification, make regulations to carry out the
provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder.
• Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations
may provide for,-
o the permissible classes of capital account transactions, the limits of
admissibility of foreign exchange for such transactions, and the
prohibition, restriction or regulation of certain capital account
transactions under section 6;
o the manner and the form in which the declaration is to be furnished
under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 7;
o the period within which and the manner of repatriation of foreign
35
 
exchange under section 8;
o the limit up to which any person may possess foreign currency or
foreign coins under clause (a) of section 9;
o the class of persons and the limit up to which foreign currency account
may be held or operated under clause (b) of section 9;
o the limit up to which foreign exchange acquired may be exempted
under clause (d) of section 9;
o the limit up to which foreign exchange acquired may be retained under
clause (e) of section 9;
o any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified.
Rules and regualations to be laid before Parliament.
Every rule and regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of
thirty days which may b comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or
the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in
the rule or regulation, or b th Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be
made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or
annulment shall be without p ejudice to the validity of anything previously done under
that rule or regulation.
Repeal and saving.
• The Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973 (46 of 1973) is hereby repealed
and the Appellate Board constituted under sub-section (1) of section 52 of the
said Act (hereinafter referred to as the repealed Act) shall stand dissolv d.
• On the dissolution of the said Appellate Board, the person appointed as
Chairman of the Appellate Board and every other person appointed as
Member and holding office as such immediately before such date shall vacate
their respective offices and no su h Chairman or other person shall be entitled
to claim any compensation for the premature termination of the term of his
office or of any contract of service.
• Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, no court shall take cognizance of an offence under the repealed Act and
no adjudicating officer shall take notice of any contravention under section 51
of the repealed A t after the expiry of a period of two years from the date of
the commencement of this Act.
• Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3) all offences committed under the
repealed Act shall continue to be governed by the provisions of the repealed
Act as if that Act had not been repealed.
• Notwithstanding such repeal,-
o anything done or any action taken or purported to have been done or
taken including any rule, notification, inspection, order or notice made
or issued or any appointment, confirmation or declaration made or any
licence, permission, authorization or e emption granted or any
document or instrument executed or any direction given under the Act
hereby repealed shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been done or taken under the
corresponding provision of this Act;
o any appeal preferred to the Appellate Board under sub-section (2) of
section 52 of the repealed Act but not disposed of before the
commencement of this Act shall stand transferred to and shall be
36
 
disposed of by the Appellate Tribunal constituted unde this Act;
o every appeal from any decision or order of the Appellate Board under
sub-section (3) or sub-section (4) of section 52 of the repealed Act
shall, if not filed before the commencement of this Act, be filed before
the High Court within a period of sixty days of such commencement
:Provided that the High Court may entertain such appeal after the
expiry of the said period of sixty days if it is satisfied that the appellant
was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal within the said
period.
• Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (3), the mention of particular
matters in sub-sections (2), (4) and (5) shall not be held to prejudice or affect
the general application of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of
1897) with regard to the effect of repeal.
37
 
Foreign Exchange
Foreign Exchange
It includes all Currency, deposits, Credits and Balances payable in Foreign
currency. It also includes Drafts/TCs, LCs and Bills of Exchange payable in
Foreign currency. In nut shell, all claims payable abroad is Foreign
Exchange.
On the other hand, Foreign Currency is narrow term which includes hard
currency say Pounds, Dollars etc.
Forex Market It comprises of individuals and entities including banks across the globe
without geographical boundaries. Forex market is dynamic and it operates
round the clock. Exchange rate of major currencies change after about
every 4 seconds. It opens from Monday to Friday except in Middle east
countries where it is closed on Friday and opens on Saturday and Sunday.
Exchange Rate mechanism
When settlement of funds and exchange
of currency takes place_________
TOD rate or Cash Rate Same day (it is also called ready rate)
TOM Rate Next working day
Spot Rate 2nd working day (48 hours)
Forward Rate After few days/months
If Next day or 2nd day is holiday in either of the two countries, the
settlement will take place on next day. For example Spot deal is
stuck on 23rd Dec. 25th is Christmas Day and 26th is Sunday. Under
such circumstances, value date will be 27th i.e. Monday.
There are two types of rates- Fixed and Floating. Floating rates are
determined by market forces of Demand and Supply. India
switched to Floating exchange rates regime in 1993.
Buy and Sell
Maxim
Buy Low Sell High (Direct Quotations)
Buy rate is also called Bid Rate and Sell Rate is called Offer Rate.
Buy High Sell Low (Indirect Quotations)
When Local Currency is fixed, bank will like to have more foreign
currency while buying and give less foreign currency while selling.
Forward Rates
(Premium is
always added and
Discount is
always deducted
from Spot Rate to
arrive at Forward
Rate)
It is required when currency is exchanged after few months/days.
Buy Transactions :
Spot Rate (+ ) premium OR ( - ) Discount
( Lower premium is added OR Higher discount is deducted )
38
 
Sale Transactions:
Spot Rate (+ )Higher premium OR (-) Lower discount
(So that currency may become cheaper while buying and dearer while
selling
In India, Forward Contracts are available for Maximum period
of 12 Months
EXCHANGE CONTROL REGULATIONS
Exchange control was first introduced in India on Sept 3, 1939. Subsequently it was
brought under Foreign
Exchange Regulation Act, 1973. At present it is regulated through FEMA 1999.
The objectives of ECR are
a conservation of foreign exchange;
b proper accounting of foreign exchange receipts and payments;
c stabilizing the external value of the rupee;
d to prevent flight of scarce capital by control over remittances abroad and supervision
of accounts of nonresidents,
so that the balance of payments deficit does not occur or does'not worsen;
e to check smuggling;
f to fulfil IMF obligations .
LIBERALISED REMITTANCE SCHEME (LRS) FOR RESIDENT INDIVIDUALS
RBI introduced LRS on Feb 04, 2004. Major changes were made by RBI in LRS w.e.f.
01.06.2015 (based
on Govt. notification 15.05.15).
Eligibility: All resident individuals including minors and non-individuals are eligible.
Remittances under the facility can be consolidated in respect of family members
subject to individual family
members complying with the terms and conditions.
It is mandatory to have PAN number to make remittances.
Forex can be purchased from authorised person which indude AD Category-1 Banks,
AD Category-2 and
Full Fledged Money Changers.
Capital Accounts transactions Remittances up to USD 250,000 per financial year
can be allowed for
permissible capital account transactions as under: I) opening of foreign currency
account abroad; ii)
purchase of property abroad;
ill) making investments abroad;
iv) setting up Wholly owned subsidiaries and Joint Ventures abroad;
v) loans including in Indian Rupees to Non-resident Indians relatives as defined in
Companies Act, 2013.
Current account transactions • : All facilities (Including private/business visits) for
remittances have been
subsumed under overall limit of USD 250,000/FY.
39
 
Facilities for Individuals
1. Individuals can avail of forex facility for the following purposes within the limit of USD
250000. Additional
remittance shall require prior approval of RBI.
1. Private visits to a country (except Nepal & Bhutan)
2. Gift or donation.
3. Going abroad for employment or immigration.
4. Maintenance of close relatives abroad
5. Travel for business, or attending a conference or specialized training or for meeting
medical expenses, or
check-up abroad, or for accompanying as attendant to a patient going abroad for
medical treatment/ check-up.
7. Expenses for medical treatment abroad
B. Studies abroad
9. Any other current account transaction
Exception : For immigration,medical treatment and studies abroad, the individualmay
avail of exchange facility in
excess of LRS limit if required by a country of emigration,medical institute offering
treatment or the university,
respectively.
Facilities for persons other than individual The following remittances shall require RBI
approval:
(i) Donations beyond 1%of forex earnings in previous 3 FY or USD 5000000,
whichever is less, for:
a) creation of Chairs in reputed educational institutes,
b) contribution to funds (not being an investment fund) promoted by educational
institutes; and
c) technical institution/body/ association in the field of activity of the donor Company.
(ii) Commission, per transaction, to agents abroad for sale of residential flats or
commercial plots in India exceeding
USD 25,000 or 5%of inward remittance whichever ismore.
(iii) Remittances exceeding USD 10000000 per project for any consultancy services for
infrastructure projects and
USD 1,000,000 per project, for other consultancy services procured fromoutside India.
(iv) Remittances exceeding 5%of investment brought into India or USD 100,000
whichever is higher, by an entity in
India by way of reimbursement of pre-incorporation expenses.
Mode of remittance: The Scheme can be used for outward remittance in the formof 'a
DD either in the resident
individual's own name or in the name of beneficiary with whomhe intends putting
through the permissible transactions
at the time of private visit abroad, can be effected, against self declaration of the
remitter in the format prescribed.
Loan facility : Banks should not extend any kind of credit facilities to resident
individuals to facilitate remittances under
the Scheme.
Remittances not available under the scheme:
40
 
i. Remittance for any purpose specifically prohibited under Schedule-I (like purchase of
lottery/sweep stakes,
tickets, prescribedmagazines etc.) or itemrestricted under Schedule II of FEMA
(Current A/c Transactions) Rules,
2000.
ii. Remittancesmade to Bhutan,Nepal,Mauritius or Pakistan.
iii. Remittancesmade to countries identified by the Financial Action Task Force (FATF)
as "non co-operative
countries and territories" as available on FATF website (viz Cook Islands, Egypt,
Guatemala, Indonesia, Myanmar,
Nauru, Nigeria, Philippines and Ukraine) or as notified by RBI.
iv. Remittances to individuals and entities identified as posing significant risk of
committing acts of terrorismas advised
separately by RBI to the banks.
Reporting of the transactions: The remittancesmade will be reported in the R-Return
in the normal course. The
ADsmay also prepare and keep on record dummy FormA2, in respect of remittances
exceeding USD 5000.
With effect from01.07.13, the banks are required to upload the data inOnline Return
Filing System(OAFS) on a
monthly basis, by 5th of the followingmonth to which it relates.Where there is no
information, 'nil' figure is to be
uploaded.
Rules related to release / remittance of foreign exchange to residents
ADbanks can release forex to residents in India as per Rules framed u/s Sec 5 of
FEMA. Forex cannot be released for
Schedule I transactions. For Schedule II transactions,Govt. permission is required. For
Schedule III transactions, forex
can be released up to specified limit byADbanks. Beyond that limit, approval of RBI is
required.
Ceilings on release of amount by ADs without RBI approval are given above, under
LRS.
Nepal & Bhutan - Forex for any kind of travel to or for any transactionwith persons
resident inNepal andBhutan cannot
be released. Any amount of Indian currency can be used.Highest denomination of
currency note can beRs.100.
Up to Rs.25000, any denomination is allowed.
Form of foreign currency: 1. Coins, currency notes and traveller's cheques. Currency
notes/coins can be up to US$
3000. The balance can be traveller's cheque or banker's draft.
2. For Iraq and Libya currency notes and coins can be obtained up toUS$ 5000 or its
equivalent.
3. For Iran, Russian Federation, and other Republics of Commonwealth of Independent
Countries, no ceiling.
Mode of purchase: In cash up toRs.50,000/-.Above this, payment byway of a crossed
cheque/banker's cheque/pay
order/demand draft / debit card / credit card only.
41
 
Surrender of unused forex: Currency notes and travellers' cheques within 180 days of
return.
Retention of unused forex : US$2,000 or its equivalent. There is no restriction on
residents for holding foreign
currency coins.
Use of International Credit Card (ICC): Use of the ICCs / ATMs/ Debit Cards can be
made for personal
payments and for travel abroad for various purposes, only up to specified limits.
Export / Import of Indian currency by Residents or non-residents : Up to Rs. 25000
each to or from
any country other than Nepal or Bhutan (Pakistan & Bangladesh Rs.10000).
Import of Foreign exchange from abroad: Any amount subject to declaration on CDF.
Mandatory CDF : Where total amount exceeds US$ 10,000 (or its equivalent) and/or
value of foreign
currency notes exceeds US$ 5,000, declaration should be made to the Customs
Authorities through
Currency Declaration Form (CDF), on arrival in India.
Application for purchase of FC : Form A2. It is not required up to $ 25000. A2 to be
preserved by banks for one
year for verification by Auditors. endorsement on Passport : It is not mandatory for
Authorised Dealers to
endorse the amount of foreign exchange sold for travel abroad on the passport of the
traveller. However, if
requested by the traveller, AD may record under its stamp, date and signature, details
of foreign exchange sold
for travel
.
Inward Remittance
1. Any person foreigner or Indian coming to India can bring any amount of foreign
exchange in India.
2. If foreign currency being brought ismore than US$ 5000 or foreign currency and
traveler cheque ismore than
US $ 10,000, then the person bringing forex shouldmake declaration before Customs
on the Currency Declaration
form. If it is not submitted to Customs, then it can be submitted to Authorised Dealer
while surrendering foreign
exchange.
3. Unspent Foreign exchange should be surrendered within 180 days of arrival in India
whether it is
foreign currency or foreign traveler cheque.
4. A resident individual can retain up to US $ 2000. There is no limit on coins.
5. Indian rupees can be brought up to Rs 25000.
6. Full fledgedMoney Changers (FFMCs) are permitted to encash foreign currency
andmake cash payment only
up to USD 3000 or its equivalent. Amount exceeding USD 3000 or its equivalent has to
be paid by way of demand
42
 
draft or bankers' cheque. RBI has allowed banks to credit proceeds of demand drafts /
bankers' cheques issued
against encashment of foreign currency to the NRE account of the NRI account holder
where the instruments
issued to the NRE account holder are supported by encashment certificate issued by
AD Category—I / Category
—II.
7. Exchange regulations are not applicable in case of remittance to or from Nepal and
Bhutan. Therefore, forex
can neither be taken to nor brought from Nepal and Bhutan. Indian rupees can be
taken to Nepal and Bhutan in
the denomination of Rs 100 or below.
Non Residents and their Accounts
Who is Resident Indian? Who is Non- Resident
A person who resides in India for more than 182 days during preceding
financial year is Resident Indian. A person who is not resident is Non-
Resident.
Who is NRI? A person who is citizen of India but resides outside India owing to:
Employment, Business, vocation-------indicating indefinite period of
stay outside.
Work abroad on assignment with Foreign Govt., UNO, and IMF etc.
Deputation officially.
Study abroad.
PIO - Persons of Indian Origin
PIO is a person who is citizen of any other country, but he at any time:
Held Indian Passport
He or his grand-parents or grand grand parents were Indian citizens
by virtue of constitution of India or under Indian Citizenship Act.
The person is spouse of Indian Citizen.
Resident: As per section 2(v) of the FEMA 1999, a person is called resident in India if
he stays in India formore than
182 days during the preceding financial year except those who have gone out of India
for taking up employment
outside India or for carrying on a business or vocation 'outside India or for any other
purpose indicating his intention
to stay abroad for indefinite period.
Non Resident: Person resident outside Indiameans a person who is not resident in
India.
NRI has been defined in Income Tax Act.
RBI definition of NRI: However, as per RBI guidelines, a non resident Indian can be a
person of Indian
Nationality or a person of Indian Origin.
Person of Indian Nationality (PIN): A Person of Indian Nationality is one who holds an
Indian passport at
the time of opening the account.
43
 
Person of IndianOrigin: A Person of IndianOrigin is one who is presently not a national
of Pakistan or Bangladesh
and : (a) who at anytime held an Indian passport; or (b) he himself, either-of his parents
or any of his grand parents
was a citizen of India by virtue of Constitution of India or the Citizenship Act,1955 ; or
(c) the person is a spouse of
Person of Indian Nationality / Origin.
Overseas Corporate Bodies are those in which at least 60% shareholding is of NRI.
OCBs are not
allowed to open NRI accounts.
Students who go abroad for studies have also been given the facility of opening NRI
accounts.
Non resident accounts are of 3 types (a) Non Resident ordinary (b) Non Resident
(External) (c) Foreign
Currency Non Resident (Bank) account. Salient features of these accounts are as
under
Non Resident Ordinary account:
1. Type of account: Saving, Current, FD and RD
2. Credit: can be local income as well as remittance from abroad.
3. Currency of deposit Indian Rupees
4. Period of Deposit and interest rate : Fixed deposit can be opened for 7 days to 10
years and interest
rate as applicable to domestic deposits
5. Joint account allowed with residents as well non residents (NRO is the only account
which can be
opened jointly with residents)
6. Interest income is taxable and tax will be deducted at source irrespective of type of
account and amount of
interest. The rate of tax on interest on deposits out of foreign remittance is 20%and on
deposits from local income
is 30%. Surcharge and education cess will be extra.
7. Power of Attorney is allowed to residents formaking local payments. Power of
Attorney can undertake all
focal payments in rupees including payments for eligible investments subject to
compliance with relevant regulations
made by the Reserve Bank; and Remittance outside India of current income in India of
the nonresident individual
account holder, net of applicable taxes. The resident Power of Attorney holder is not
permitted to repatriate outside
India funds held in the account other than to the non-resident individual account holder
nor tomake payment by way
of gift to a resident on behalf of the non-resident account holder or transfer funds
fromthe account to another NRO
account.
8. Repatriation is allowed as per following details: (i) Remittance outside India of
current income like rent, dividend,
pension, interest, etc. in India of the account holder. (ii) Remittance up to USD
onemillion, per financial year (April-
44
 
March), for all bonafide purposes, to the satisfaction of the authorised dealer bank. (iii)
sale proceeds of immovable
property up to US $ 10 lakh per financial year without waiting for 10 year period.
Non-Resident accounts can be opened:
By any person resident outside India (other than a person resident
in Nepal and Bhutan) can open NRO account, maintain it for 6M
and can convert it into foreign currency after completion of stay
provided no local funds are credited to the account.
Deposit may be held jointly with residents
Currency of Deposit is Indian Rupees
Not Repatriable except for the following in the account - 1) Current
income 2) Up-to USD 1 Million per financial year.
Type of Deposit may be Savings, Current, Recurring, Fixed Deposit.
Existing accounts of residents are converted to NRO category
consequent upon their becoming NRIs.
TDS called withholding Tax is applicable at 30% + Service Tax
+Education Cess.
Prior permission of RBI is required to open NRO account of
Pakistani national. However permission is not required
Non Resident (External) and ForeignCurrencyNon Resident (Bank) account
There are certain common features in these accounts like
1. Credits: Only amount received from abroad can be credited to these accounts.
2. Joint account is allowed only with Non residents and not allowed with residents.
3. Power of attorney is allowed to residents. He can make local payments. POA can
remit money abroad if
permitted by Power of Attorney.
4. Maximum loan against NRE and FCNR(B) is allowed up to Rs 100 lakh.
5. Interest income is free of Income tax and therefore tax is not deducted at source
6. Repatriation: Entire balance including interest can be repatriated abroad.
The other features are:
Deposits are held in Indian currency.
The Principal and Interest both can be repatriated.
Account holder bears the risk of fluctuations in currency rates.
Account will be opened with proceeds from abroad.
Funds originating in India cannot be deposited.
Interest rates Have since been deregulated by RBI..
No lien is permitted to be marked against SB deposits.
Joint account with Indians can be opened as Former or Survivor.
Cheque book and IBS allowed.
Nomination in favor of NRI/Resident Indian allowed.
Interest Income is exempt from Income Tax, Gift Tax or Wealth Tax.
TOD allowed up to Rs. 50000/- for maximum 2 weeks.
Account can be operated in India through mandate also.
Loans against FDR to 3rd parties allowed provided NRI is personally
present for documentation.
45
 
FCNR- B accounts
FCNRB accounts can also be opened by NRIs. The conditions of NRE
deposits as explained above are also applicable on FCNR-B deposits with
the following additional features:
Only FD 1-5 years tenure can be opened.
The amount is kept in Foreign Currency and repaid in the Foreign
Currency.
6 currencies i.e. GBP, USD, Euro, JPY, CAD. AUD are eligible
currencies for opening the account.
No exchange risk for the customer. The bank bears the risk.
Interest on the basis of 360 days in a year
Half yearly intervals of 180 days
Interest exemptions from I.T.
Operating by P/A not permitted.
The amount of Principle and Interest is freely repatriable
Interest Rate on 1-3 years FD is LIBOR + 200 bps and that of 3-5
years FD is LIBOR + 400 bps.(Previously, it was LIBOR + 300 bps)
Rupee Loans against NRE/FCNRB FDRs
Demand Loan or Overdraft is allowed against FDR. There is no maximum
limitof loan against pledge of FDR (Which was100 lac earlier). The loan
can be availed for :
Personal purpose.
Investment.
Purchase of property.
The loan can be repaid :
From proceeds of abroad
From NRE/FCNR account
From local resources through NRO account.
Resident Accounts Operation Either or Survivor with non- resident
It has been decided that AD banks may include an NRI close relative
(relatives as defined in Section 6 of the Companies Act, 1956) in existing /
new resident bank accounts as joint holder with the resident account holder
on “Either or Survivor” basis subject to the following conditions:
Such account will be treated as resident bank account
Cheques, instruments, remittances, cash, card belonging to the NRI
close relative shall not be eligible for credit to this account
The NRI close relative shall operate such account only for and on
behalf of the resident for domestic payment
Where due to any eventuality, the non-resident account holder becomes
46
 
the survivor, it shall be categorized as NRO account
Investments by NRIs in India
NRIs are allowed to invest in India on Repatriation basis as well as on Non-
Repatriation basis. NRI can purchase Equity Shares, Preference shares
and Convertible Debentures in Indian companies subject to conditions
under following categories:
1. Foreign Direct Investments.
2. Portfolio Investment
3. Purchase and Sale of Shares on Non-Repatriation basis.
4. Purchase of other securities of Indian Companies.
5. Exchange Traded Derivatives.
Besides above, NRIs are permitted to invest in:
Units of UTI and Mutual Funds
Company Deposits – Minimum 3 years‟ period.
Share in Proprietorship firm/partnership firm provided the firm is not
engaged in Agriculture and Plantation activity or Property business.
Acquiring of Immovable property not being Agriculture, Plantation or
Farm House.
NRI can acquire IP by way of :
Purchase out of funds received in India
By way of gift from resident in India or outside India.
By way of Inheritance from a person resident outside India.
The Income from the property or sale proceeds of the property can be
repatriated outside India up to monetary limit of USD1 Million per financial
year provided all the applicable taxes are paid.
NRIs can invest in Govt. securities, treasury bills on non- repatriation
basis. However, NRI cannot invest in Small saving Schemes including
PPF.
Loans to NRIs NRI can avail the following loans:
1. Rupee Loans in India
- Up to up to any limit subject to prescribed margin.
- For personal purpose, contribution to Capital in Indian
Companies or for acquisition of property.
- Repayment of loan will be either from inward remittances or
from local resources through NRO accounts.
2. Foreign Currency Loans in India
- Against security of funds in FCNR-B deposits.
- Maturity of loan should not exceed due date of deposits.
- Repayment from Fresh remittances or from maturity proceeds of
deposits.
3. Loans to 3rd Parties provided
47
 
- There is no direct or indirect consideration for NRE depositor
agreeing to pledge his FD.
- Margin, rate of Interest and Purpose of loan shall be as per RBI
guidelines.
- The loan will be utilized for personal purpose or business
purpose and not for re-lending or carrying out
Agriculture/Plantation/Real estate activities.
- Loan documents will be executed personally by the depositor
and Power of attorney is not allowed.
4. Housing Loans to NRIs : HL can be sanctioned to NRIs subject to
following conditions:
- Quantum of loan, Margin and period of Repayment shall be
same as applicable to Indian resident.
- The loan shall not be credited to NRE/FCNR account of the
customer.
- EM of IP is must and lien on assets.
- Repayment from remittance abroad or by debit to NRE/FCNR
account or from rental income derived from property.
Portfolio Investment Scheme for NRIs
RBI has permitted NRIs to invest in PIS subject to following conditions:
Investment on repatriation as well as non-repatriation basis.
Purchase/Sale of shares and debentures
Through Regd. Brokers
Amount is routed through designated branch.
Only delivery based transactions
Investment on Repatriation basis can be made out of inward
remittances or out of NRE/FCNR deposits.
Investment on Non-Repatriation basis can be made out of NRO
deposits besides NRE/FCNR deposits.
Ceiling PER Investor
5% of paid up capital of Indian Company or 5% of Value of each issue of
convertible debentures.
Ceiling PER Investor Company
10% of paid up capital of Indian Company or 10% of Value of each issue of
convertible debentures.
48
 
RBI controls Foreign Exchange
RBI is empowered to
Control and regulate Foreign Exchange Reserves
Supervise Foreign Exchange dealings
Maintain external value of Rupee
FERA was replaced by FEMA in the year 1999.
FEMA provisions
The important FEMA guidelines with regard to Foreign exchange are as
under:
1. No drawl of exchange for Nepal and Bhutan
2. If Rupee equivalent exceeds Rs. 50000/-, payment by way of
crossed Cheque.
3. During visit abroad, one can carry foreign currency notes up to USD
3000 or equivalent. For Libya and Iraq, the limit is USD5000 and the
entire amount for Iran and Russian states.
4. Indian citizens can retain and possess foreign currency up to USD
2000 or its equivalent.
5. Unspent currency must be surrendered within a period of 180 days
after arrival in India.
Basic Travel Quota (BTQ)
Purpose of Visit Up to USD or equivalent
Personal/Tourism 10000 per financial year
Business Purpose 25000 per visit
Seminars/conferences 25000 per visit
Employment/Immigration 100000
Studies 100000 per academic year
Medical 100000
Donations/Gifts 5000 per donor per year
Consultancy services 100000 per project
Debit Credit/Credit Card As per BTQ as above
*AD can release Foreign Exchange 60 days ahead of journey
LRS (Liberalized Remittance Scheme)
The scheme is meant for Resident Indians individuals. They can freely
remit up USD 125000 per financial year in respect of any current or capital
account transaction without prior approval of RBI. The precondition is that
the remitter should have been a customer of the bank for the last 1 year.
PAN is mandatory.
Not Applicable
The scheme is not applicable for remittance to Nepal, Bhutan, Pak,
Mauritius or other counties identified by FATF.
The scheme is not meant for remittance by Corporate.
Latest Guidelines
49
 
The scheme should not be used for making remittances for any
prohibited or illegal activities such as margin trading, lottery etc., as
hitherto.
Resident individuals have now been allowed to set up Joint
Ventures (JV) / Wholly Owned Subsidiaries (WOS) outside India for
bonafide business activities outside India within the limit of USD
125000
The limit for gift in Rupees by Resident Individuals to NRI close
relatives and loans in Rupees by resident individuals to NRI close
relatives shall accordingly stand modified to USD 1,25,000 per
financial year.
RBI has clarified that Scheme can now be used for acquisition of IP
outside India.
Import and Export of Indian Rupees
Any person resident in India
a) May take outside India (other than Nepal and Bhutan) currency
notes up to Rs. 25000/- or
b) May bring into India (from country other than Nepal and Bhutan)
currency notes up to Rs. 25000/-
Any person Resident Outside India (Not being citizen of Pak and
Bangladesh)
a) May take outside India currency up to Rs. 25000/-
b) May bring into India currency notes up to 25000/-
(Previously, the limit was Rs. 10000/-)
Any amount can be taken out while going to Nepal and Bhutan in any
denomination. (Prev. Notes up to 100 denomination were allowed)
Restrictions Customer is required to furnish PAN No. for cash remittance beyond
25000/-.
If rupee equivalent is 50000/- and above, the entire payment has to
be made by way of crossed cheque or DD.
RETURNS TO BE SUBMITTED TO RBI
Following important returns are submitted to RBI
R- Returns Forex Operations (Fortnightly)
BAL statement Balance in Nostro/Vostro account
STAT 5 Transactions in FCNR B accounts
(Fortnightly)
STAT 8 Transactions in NRE/NRO accounts
(Fortnightly
LRS Statement UP to USD 200000 (monthly)
Trade Credit Statement Buyers‟ and Suppliers‟ Credit
XOS O/S Overdue Export bills (6M overdue)
BEF Import Remittance effected but Bill of Entry
not submitted for >3M.
50
 
