Digital Banking
1. Digital banking is the move to online banking where banking services are delivered over the internet.
The advantages for banks and customers are providing more convenient and faster banking services.
The shift from traditional to digital banking has been gradual and should be rather described in degrees of
service digitization than through a categorization into yes and no. It involves high levels of process
automation and web-based services and may include APIs enabling cross-institutional service
composition to deliver banking products and provide transactions. It provides the ability for users to
access financial data through desktop, mobile and ATM services
2. Digital India
Digital India is a campaign launched by the Government of India to ensure that Government services are
made available to citizens electronically by improved online infrastructure and by increasing Internet
connectivity or by making the country digitally empowered in the field of technology.
It was launched on 1 July 2015 by Prime Minister Narendra Modi. The initiative includes plans to connect
rural areas with high-speed internet networks. Digital India consists of three core components. These
include:
The creation of digital infrastructure
Delivery of services digitally
Digital literacy
Major Advantages of Digital India:
i. Creation of Digital Infrastructure and Electronic Manufacturing in Native India.
ii. Digital Empowerment of Native Indian People.
iii. Delivery of all Government Services electronically (E-Governance).
iv. A Digital Identification which will verify the end user.
v. A Mobile for worldwide access to all services.
vi. A Bank account for Immediate Benefit Transfers of subsidies and payments.
vii. The program also aims to eliminate all electronics imports from foreign countries by
2020 and make India a electronics manufacturing super power.
Other Advantages:
This website stoIrte wsi ldl ahteal ps uinc hd eacsreasing crime if applied on whole.
cokies to enabIlet w eislls heenltpia iln s giteetting things done easily.
It will help in decreasing documentation.
functionality, as wel as marketing,
Some of the services which will be provided through this desire effort are Digital
personalization, and analytics. You
Locker, e-education, e-health, e-sign and nationwide scholarship portal.
may change your setings at any time
It will ostensibly create a lot of jobs.
or acept the default setings.
It will be a boost to industry; both large and small enterprises.
3. A digital bank represents a virtual process that includes online banking and beyond. As an end-to-end
Privacy Policy
platform, digital banking must encompass the front end that consumers see, the back end that bankers
see through their servers and admin control panels and the middleware that connects these nodes.
Marketing
Ultimately, a digital bank should facilitate all functional levels of banking on all service delivery platforms.
In other words, it should have all the same functions as a head office, branch office, online service, bank
Personalization
cards, ATM and point of sale machines.
Analytics
Save Acept Al
  
Page 7
The reason digital banking is more than just a mobile or online platform is that it includes middleware
solutions. Middleware is software that bridges operating systems or databases with other applications.
Financial industry departments such as risk management, product development and marketing must also
be included in the middle and back end to truly be considered a complete digital bank. Financial
institutions must be at the forefront of the latest technology to ensure security and compliance with
government regulations
4. The earliest forms of digital banking trace back to the advent of ATM machines and cards launched in
the 1960s. As the internet emerged in the 1980s with early broadband, digital networks began to connect
retailers with suppliers and consumers to develop needs for early online catalogues and inventory
software systems.
By the 1990s the Internet emerged and online banking started becoming the norm. The improvement
of broadband and ecommerce systems in the early 2000s led to what resembled the modern digital
banking world today. The proliferation of smartphones through the next decade opened the door for
transactions on the go beyond ATM machines. Over 60% of consumers now use their smartphones as
the preferred method for digital banking.
The challenge for banks is now to facilitate demands that connect vendors with money through channels
determined by the consumer. This dynamic shapes the basis of customer satisfaction, which can be
nurtured with Customer Relationship Management (CRM) software. Therefore, CRM must be integrated
into a digital banking system, since it provides means for banks to directly communicate with their
customers.
There is a demand for end-to-end consistency and for services, optimized on convenience and user
experience. The market provides cross platform front ends, enabling purchase decisions based on
available technology such as mobile devices, with a desktop or Smart TV at home. In order for banks to
meet consumer demands, they need to keep focusing on improving digital technology that
provides agility, scalability and efficiency.
5. A study conducted in 2015 revealed that 47% of bankers see potential to improve customer
relationship thr ough digital banking, 44% see it as a means to generate competitive advantage, 32% as a
channel for new customer acquisition. Only 16% emphasized the potential for cost saving.
Major benefits of digital benefits are:
Business efficiency - Not only do digital platforms improve interaction with customers and deliver

their needs more quickly, they also provide methods for making internal functions more efficient.
While banks have been at the forefront of digital technology at the consumer end for decades, they
have not completely embraced all the benefits of middleware to accelerate productivity.
Cost savings - One of the keys for banks to cut costs is automated applications that replace

redundant manual labor. Traditional bank processing is costly, slow and prone to human error,
This website stores data such as
according to McKinsey & Company. Relying on people and paper also takes up office space, which
cokies to enabrlue ness suepn etinael srgitye and storage costs. Digital platforms can future reduce costs through the synergies of
functionality, as mwoerle a qsu malaitrakteivtien gd,ata and faster response to market changes.
personalization, and analytics. You
Increased accuracy - Traditional banks that rely mainly on paper processing can have an error

may change yourar tsee otifn ugps taot 4an0y% t,im wehich requires reworking. Coupled with lack of IT integration between branch and
or acept the debfaaucklt soeftftiicneg sp.ersonnel, this problem reduces business efficiency. By simplifying the verification
process, it's easier to implement IT solutions with business software, leading to more accurate
accounting. Financial accuracy is crucial for banks to comply with government regulations.
Privacy Policy Improved competitiveness - Digital solutions help manage marketing lists, allowing banks to

reach broader markets and build closer relationships with tech savvy consumers. CRM platforms can
Marketintgrack customer history and provide quick access to email and other forms of online communication.
It's effective for executing customer rewards programs that can improve loyalty and satisfaction.
Personalization
Greater agility - The use of automation can speed up both external and internal processes, both

Analytics
oinfc wrehaische dc aenm imphparsoivse wcauss topmlaecre dsa otins farcistkio nm. aFnoallgoewminegn tth. eI ncsotellaapds oef obf afinnkasn chiairli nmga raknedts t irna in2i0n0g8 ,r iasnk
Save Acept Al
  
Page 8
management professionals, it's possible for risk management software to detect and respond to
market changes more quickly than even seasoned professionals.
Enhanced security - All businesses big or small face a growing number of cyber threats that can

damage reputations. In February 2016 the Internal Revenue Service announced it had been hacked
the previous year, as did several big tech companies. Banks can benefit from extra layers of security
to protect data.
In a contemporary Banking era, Digital is a buzzword and Banks have to stay in race for new-gen needs
of digital banking Digital Banking is not only front end concepts such as Internet Banking, Mobile Banking,
Direct Banking, Various Banking apps, use of Social Media in Banking, Artificial Intelligence, Robotics,
Chat-bots, Cognitive computing, Block-chain, Big Data, voice biometrics etc ; however it also includes
various back-end modernization programs are done to enable overall goals of digital Banking which
includes legacy modernization, Integration, CRM, Document Imaging / OCR etc. Training course on
Digital Banking at Udemy called "Story of Digital Banking" has video lectures on this.
Banks are going through tremendous challenges of competition from non-banking companies and smaller
Fintech companies. Therefore, in order to fight competition and stay ahead of competition in Digital
Banking era, it is important for banks to work on not only good web site, social media connect and mobile
banking etc; but they also need to innovate with new technology disruptions where AI, ML, Block-chain,
Analyics, cloud become buzzwords.
6. A key in which digital banks can gain a significant competitive edge is developing a more robust IT
architecture. By replacing manual back-office procedures with automated software solutions, banks can
reduce employee errors and speed up processes. This paradigm shift can lead to smaller operational
units and allow managers to concentrate on improving tasks that require human intervention.
Automation reduces the need for paper, which inevitably ends up taking up space that can be occupied
with technology. By using software that accelerates productivity up to 50%, banks can improve customer
service since they will be able to resolve issues at a faster pace. One way a bank can improve its back
end business efficiency is to divide hundreds of processes into three categories:
full automated

partially automated

manual tasks

It still isn't practical to automate all operations for many financial firms, especially those that conduct
financial reviews or provide investment advice. But the more a bank can replace cumbersome redundant
manual tasks with automation, the more it can focus on issues that involve direct communication with
customers. The obstacles currently preventing banks from investing in a more digital back end
environment are:
This website stores data such as
banks have traditionally prioritized launching new products that are still difficult to automate

cokies to enable esential site
mergers and acquisitions, new products and government regulations have already established

functionality, as wel as marketing,
complex IT architecture difficult to revise
personalization, and analytics. You
IT teams do not always grasp business priorities
may change your setings at any time
many banks lack the in-house IT expertise beyond traditional mainframe environments
or acept the default setings.
7. Digital cash eliminates many problems associated with physical cash, such as misplacement or the
Privacy Policy
potential for money to be stolen or damaged. Additionally, digital cash can be traced and accounted for
more accurately in cases of disputes. As consumers find an increasing number of purchasing
Marketing
opportunities at their fingertips, there is less need to carry physical cash in their wallets.
Personalization
Other indications that demand for digital cash is growing are highlighted by the use of peer-to-peer
payment systems such as PayPal and the rise of untraceable cryptocurrencies such as bitcoin. Almost
Analytics
anything imaginable that can be paid with physical cash can theoretically be paid with the swipe of a bank
Save Acept Al
  
Page 9
card, including parking meters. The problem is this technology is still not omnipresent. Cash circulation
grew in the United States by 42% between 2007 and 2012, with an average annual growth rate of 7%,
according to the BBC.
The concept of an all digital cash economy is no longer just a futuristic dream but it's still unlikely to
outdate physical cash in the near future. All digital banks are possible as a consumer option, but people
may still have a need for physical cash in certain situations. ATMs help banks cut overhead, especially if
they are available at various strategic locations beyond branch offices
8. Security is a cornerstone of digital banking. Information security is a set of strategies for managing the
processes, tools and policies necessary to prevent, detect, document and counter threats to digital and
non-digital information. Information security responsibilities include establishing a set of business
processes that will protect information assets regardless of how the infor mation is formatted or whether it
is in transit, is being processed or is at rest in storage.
Information security pro grams are built around the core objectives of the CIA triad: maintaining
the confidentiality, integrity and availability of IT systems and business data. These objectives ensure that
sensitive information is only disclosed to authorized parties (confidentiality), prevent unauthorized
modification of data (integrity) and guarantee the data can be accessed by authorized parties when
requested (availability).
Many large enterprises employ a dedicated security group to implement and maintain the organization's
information security program. Typically, this group is led by a chief information security officer. The
security group is generally responsible for conducting risk management, a process through which
vulnerabilities and threats to information assets are continuously assessed, and the appropriate protective
controls are decided on and applied. The value of an organization lies within its information -- its security
is critical for business operations, as well as retaining credibility and earning the trust of clients.
Thr eats to sensitive and private information come in many different forms, such
This websitaes s tomreaslw daarteaa snudc hp ahsishing attacks, identity theft and ransomware. To deter attackers and mitigate
cokies to enable esential site
vulnerabilities at various points, multiple security controls are implemented and coordinated as part of a
functionality, as wel as marketing,
personalizaltaioyne,r eadn dd aenfeanlysteic sin. Ydoeupth strategy. This should minimize the impact of an attack. To be prepared for a
may change your setings at any time
or acept thsee cduerfaityu ltb sreeatcinhg, ss.ecurity groups should have an incident response plan (IRP) in place. This should allow
them to contain and limit the damage, remove the cause and apply updated defense controls.
Privacy Policy
PILLERS OF INFORMATION SECURITY
Marketing
PersSoencaulirziatyti oisn a constant worry when it comes to information technology. Data theft, hacking, malware and a
host of other threats are enough to keep any IT professional up at night.
Analytics
Information security follows three overarching principles:
Save Acept Al
  
Page 10
Confidentiality: This means that information is only being seen or used by people who are authorized

to access it.
Integrity: This means that any changes to the information by an unauthorized user are impossible

(or at least detected), and changes by authorized users are tracked.
Availability: This means that the information is accessible when authorized users need it.

9. The Payment and Settlement Systems Act 2007, set up by the RBI, provides for the r egulation and
supervision of payment systems in India and designates the apex institution (RBI) as the authority for that
purpose and all related matters. To exercise its powers and perform its functions and discharge its duties,
the RBI is authorized under the Act to constitute a committee of its central board, which is known as the
Board for Regulation and Supervision of Payment and Settlement Systems (BPSS). The Act also
provides the legal basis for ‘netting’ and ‘settlement finality’.
The PSS Act, 2007 received the assent of the President on 20th December 2007 and came into force
with effect from 12th August 2008
10. The PSS Act, 2007 provides for the regulation and supervision of payment systems in India and
designates the Reserve Bank of India (Reserve Bank) as the authority for that purpose and all related
matters. The Reserve Bank is authorized under the Act to constitute a Committee of its Central Board
known as the Board for Regulation and Supervision of Payment and Settlement Systems (BPSS), to
exercise its powers and perform its functions and discharge its duties under this statute. The Act also
provides the legal basis for “netting” and “settlement finality”. This is of great importance, as in India, other
than the Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) system all other payment systems function on a net
settlement basis.
11. Under the PSS Act, 2007, two Regulations have been made by the Reserve Bank of India, namely,
the Board for Regulation and Supervision of Payment and Settlement Systems Regulations, 2008 and the
Payment and Settlement Systems Regulations, 2008. Both these Regulations came into force along with
the PSS Act, 2007 on 12th August 2008
12. The Board for Regulation and Supervision of Payment and Settlement Systems Regulation, 2008
deals with the constitution of the Board for Regulation and Supervision of Payment and Settlement
Systems (BPSS), a Committee of the Central Board of Directors of the Reserve Bank of India. It also
This website stores data such as
deals with the composition of the BPSS, its powers and functions, exercising of powers on behalf of
cokies to eBnPaSbSle, emseeentitniagls s iotef the BPSS and quorum, the constitution of Sub-Committees/Advisory Committees by
functionalityB, PaSs Sw,e lel atcs. mTahreke tBinPgS, S exercises the powers on behalf of the Reserve Bank, for regulation and
personalizastiuopne, ravnisdi oann aolfy tthices .p Yaoyument and settlement systems under the PSS Act, 2007.
may change your setings at any time
or acept thTeh dee fPaauyltm seetntitn gasn.d Settlement Systems Regulations, 2008 covers matters like form of application for
authorization for commencing/ carrying on a payment system and grant of authorization, payment
instructions and determination of standards of payment systems, furnishing of returns/documents/other
Privacy Poliincyformation, furnishing of accounts and balance sheets by system provider etc
Marketing
13. India has multiple payments and settlement systems, both gross and net settlement systems. For
gross settlement India has a Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) system called by the same name and
Personalization
net settlement systems include Electronic Clearing Services (ECS Credit), Electronic Clearing Services
Anal(yEtiCcsS Debit), credit cards, debit cards, the National Electronic Fund Transfer (NEFT) system
and Immediate Payment Service.
Save Acept Al
  
Page 11
14. Electronic Payment and Settlement Systems in India
The Reserve Bank of India is doing its best to encourage alternative methods of payments which will
bring security and efficiency to the payments system and make the whole process easier for banks.
The Indian banking sector has been growing successfully, innovating and trying to adopt and implement
electronic payments to enhance the banking system. Though the Indian payment systems have always
been dominated by paper-based transactions, e-payments are not far behind. Ever since the introduction
of e-payments in India, the banking sector has witnessed growth like never before.
According to a survey by celent, the ratio of e-payments to paper based transactions has considerably
increased between 2004 and 2008. This has happened as a result of advances in technology and
increasing consumer awareness of the ease and efficiency of internet and mobile transactions.[2]
In the case of India, the RBI has played a pivotal role in facilitating e-payments by making it compulsory
for banks to route high value transactions through Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) and also by
introducing NEFT (National Electronic Funds Transfer) and NECS (National Electronic Clearing Services)
which has encouraged individuals and businesses to switch ia is clearly one of the fastest growing
countries for payment cards in the Asia-Pacific region. Behavioral patterns of Indian customers are also
likely to be influenced by their internet accessibility and usage, which currently is about 32 million PC
users, 68% of whom have access to the net. However these statistical indications are far from the reality
where customers still prefer to pay "in line" rather than online, with 63% payments still being made in cash.
E-payments have to be continuously promoted showing consumers the various routes through which they
can make these payments like ATM’s, the internet, mobile phones and drop boxes.
Due to the efforts of the RBI and the (BPSS) now over 75% of all transaction volume are in the electronic
mode, including both large-value and retail payments. Out of this 75%, 98% come from the RTGS (large-
value payments) whereas a meager 2% come from retail payments. This means consumers have not yet
accepted this as a regular means of paying their bills and still prefer conventional methods. Retail
payments if made via electronic modes are done by ECS (debit and credit), EFT and card payments.[2]
15.Electronic Clearing Service (ECS Credit)
Known as "Credit-push" facility or one-to-many facility this method is used mainly for large-value or bulk
payments where the receiver’s account is credited with the payment from the institution making the
payment. Such payments are made on a timely-basis like a year, half a year, etc. and used to pay
salaries, dividends or commissions. Over time it has become one of the most convenient methods of
making large payments.
16. Electronic Clearing Services (ECS Debit)
This website stores data such as
cokies to eKnnaobwlen e ass emnatianly s-titoe-one or "debit-pull" facility this method is used mainly for small value payments from
consumers/ individuals to big organizations or companies. It eliminates the need for paper and instead
functionality, as wel as marketing,
makes the payment through banks/corporates or government departments. It facilitates individual
personalization, and analytics. You
payments like telephone bills, electricity bills, online and card payments and insurance payments. Though
may change your setings at any time
easy this method lacks popularity because of lack of consumer awareness.
or acept the default setings.
17.Credit cards and Debit cards
Privacy Po lAicsy mentioned above India is one of the fastest growing countries in the plastic money segment. Already
there are 130 million cards in circulation, which is likely to increase at a very fast pace due to rampant
Markceotninsgumerism. India’s card market has been recording a growth rate of 30% in the last 5 years. Card
payments form an integral part of e-payments in India because customers make many payments on their
Personalization
card-paying their bills, transferring funds and shopping.
Analytics
Ever since Debit cards entered India, in 1998 they have been growing in number and today they consist
of nearly 3/4th of the total number of cards in circulation.
Save Acept Al
  
Page 12
Credit cards have shown a relatively slower growth even though they entered the market one decade
before debit cards. Only in the last 5 years has there been an impressive growth in the number of credit
cards- by 74.3% between 2004 and 2008. It is expected to grow at a rate of about 60% considering levels
of employment and disposable income. Majority of credit card purchases come from expenses on
jewellery, dining and shopping.
Another recent innovation in the field of plastic money is co branded credit cards, which combine many
services into one card-where banks and other retail stores, airlines, telecom companies enter into
business partnerships. This increases the utility of these cards and hence they are used not only in ATM’s
but also at Point of sale (POS) terminals and while making payments on the net.
18.Real-time gross settlement
The acronym 'RTGS' stands for real time gross settlement. The Reserve Bank of India (India's Central
Bank) maintains this payment network. Real Time Gross Settlement is a funds transfer mechanism where
transfer of money takes place from one bank to another on a 'real time' and on 'gross' basis. This is the
fastest possible money transfer system through the banking channel. Settlement in 'real time' means
payment transaction is not subjected to any waiting period. The transactions are settled as soon as they
are processed. 'Gross settlement' means the transaction is settled on one to one basis without bunching
with any other transaction. Considering that money transfer takes place in the books of the Reserve Bank
of India, the payment is taken as final and irrevocable.
Fees for RTGS vary from bank to bank. RBI has prescribed upper limit for the fees which can be charged
by all banks both for NEFT and RTGS. Both the remitting and receiving must have core banking in place
to enter into RTGS transactions. Core Banking enabled banks and branches are assigned an Indian
Financial System Code (IFSC) for RTGS and NEFT purposes. This is an eleven digit alphanumeric code
and unique to each branch of bank. The first four letters indicate the identity of the bank and remaining
seven numerals indicate a single branch. This code is provided on the cheque books, which are required
for transactions along with recipient's account number.
RTGS is a large value (minimum value of transaction should be ₹2,00,000) funds transfer system
whereby financial intermediaries can settle interbank transfers for their own account as well as for their
customers. The system effects final settlement of interbank funds transfers on a continuous, transaction-
by-transaction basis throughout the processing day. Customers can access the RTGS facility between 9
am to 4:30 pm (Interbank up to 6:30 pm) on weekdays and 9 am to 2:00 pm (Interbank up to 3:00 pm) on
Saturdays. However, the timings that the banks follow may vary depending on the bank branch. Time
Varying Charges has been introduced w.e.f. 1 October 2011 by RBI. The basic purpose of RTGS is to
facilitate the transactions which need immediate access for the completion of the transaction.
Banks could use balances maintained under the cash reserve ratio (CRR) and the intra-day liquidity (IDL)
to be supplied by the central bank, for meeting any eventuality arising out of the real time gross
settlement (RTGS). The RBI fixed the IDL limit for banks to three times their net owned fund (NOF).
This website stores data such as
cokies to eTnhaeb lIeD eLs wseilnl tbiael scithearged at ₹25 per transaction entered into by the bank on the RTGS platform. The
functionalitym, aasrk wetealbl ales smeacrukreittiiensg ,and treasury bills will have to be placed as collateral with a margin of five per cent.
personalizaHtioonw,e avnedr ,a tnhael yatpicesx. Yboaunk will also impose severe penalties if the IDL is not paid back at the end of the day.
may change your setings at any time
The RTGS service window for customer's transactions is available from 8:00 hours to 19:00 hours on
or acept the default setings.
week days and from 8:00 hours to 13:00 hours on Saturdays.
No Transaction on weekly holidays and public holidays.
Privacy Policy
Service Charge for RTGS
Markae) tIinnwgard transaction– no charge to be levied.
b) Outward transactions –
Personalization
- For transactions of ₹2 lakhs to ₹5 lakhs -up to ₹25 per transaction plus applicable Time Varying
AnalCythicasrges (₹1/- to ₹5/-); total not exceeding ₹30 per transaction, (+ GST).
Save Acept Al
  
Page 13
- Above ₹5 lakhs - ₹50 per transaction plus applicable Time Varying Charges (₹1/- to ₹5/-); total charges
not exceeding ₹55 per transaction, (+ GST).
No time varying charges are applicable for RTGS transactions settled up to 1300 hrs.
19.National Electronic Funds Transfer (NEFT)
Main article: National Electronic Fund Transfer
[1]
Started in Nov.-2005, the National Electronic Fund Transfer (NEFT) system is a nationwide system that
facilitates individuals, firms and corporates to electronically transfer funds from any bank branch to any
individual, firm or corporate having an account with any other bank branch in the country.It is done via
electronic messages. Even though it is not on real time basis like RTGS (Real Time Gross Settlement),
hourly batches are run in order to speed up the transactions.
For being part of the NEFT funds transfer network, a bank branch has to be NEFT-enabled. NEFT has
gained popularity due to it saving on time and the ease with which the transactions can be concluded. As
at end-January 2011, 74,680 branches / offices of 101 banks in the country (out of around 82,400 bank
branches) are NEFT-enabled. Steps are being taken to further widen the coverage both in terms of banks
and branches offices. As on 30.12.2017 total no of NEFT enabled branches are increased to 139682 of
188 Banks. (https://www.rbi.org.in/Scripts/bs_viewcontent.aspx?Id=112)
20.Indo-Nepal Remittance Facility Scheme
Indo-Nepal Remittance Facility is a cross-border remittance scheme to transfer funds from India to Nepal,
enabled under the NEFT Scheme. The scheme was launched to provide a safe and cost-efficient avenue
to migrant Nepalese workers in India to remit money back to their families in Nepal. A remitter can
transfer funds up to ₹50,000 (maximum permissible amount) from any of the NEFT-enabled branches in
India.The beneficiary would receive funds in Nepalese Rupees.
21.Immediate Payment Service (IMPS)
Immediate Payment Service (IMPS) is an initiative of National Payments Corporation of India (NPCI). It is
a service through which money can be transferred immediately from one account to the other account,
within the same bank or accounts across other banks. Upon registration, both the individuals are issued
an MMID(Mobile Money Identifier) Code from their respective banks. This is a 7 digit numeric code. To
initiate the transaction, the sender in his mobile banking application need to enter the registered mobile
number of the receiver, MMID of the receiver and amount to be transferred. Upon successful transaction,
the money gets credited in the account of the receiver instantly. This facility is available 24X7 and can be
used through mobile banking application. Some banks have also started providing this service through
internet banking profile of their customers. Though most banks offer this facility free of cost to encourage
paperless payment system, ICICI bank and Axis bank charge for it as per their respective NEFT charges.
This website stores data such as
Nowadays, money through this service can be transferred directly also by using the receiver's bank
cokies to enable esential site
account number and IFS code. In such case, neither the receiver of the money need to be registered for
functionality, as wel as marketing,
mobile banking service of his bank, nor does he need MMID code. IMPS facility differs
personalization, and analytics. You
from NEFT and RTGS as there is no time limit to carry out the transaction. This facility can be availed
may change your setings at any time
24X7 and on all public and bank holidays including RBI holidays.
or acept the default setings.
22.Bharat Bill Payment System
Privacy PolBichyarat Bill Payment System(BBPS) is an integrated bill payment system in India offering interoperable
and accessible bill payment service to customers through a network of agents, enabling multiple payment
Markmeotidnegs, and providing instant confirmation of paymentThis is still in implementation stage. Guidelines for
implementation of this system were issued on November 28, 2014.
Personalization
Analytics
23.Channels of e-payment
Save Acept Al
  
Page 14
In their effort to enable customers to make payments the electronic way banks have developed many
channels of payments viz. the internet, mobiles, ATM’s (Automated Teller Machines) and drop boxes.
The internet as a channel of payment is one of the most popular especially among the youth. Debit and
credit payments are made by customers on various bank’s websites for small purchases,(retail payments)
and retail transfers( ATM transfers).
ATM’s serve many other purposes, apart from functioning as terminals for withdrawals and balance
inquiries, such as payment of bills through ATM’s, applications for cheques books and loans can also be
made via ATM’s.
Banks also provide telephone and mobile banking facilities. Through call agents payments can be made
and as the number of telephone and mobile subscribers are expected to rise, so is this channel of
payment expected to gain popularity.
Drop boxes provide a solution to those who have no access to the internet or to a telephone or mobile.
These drop-boxes are kept in the premises of banks and the customers can drop their bills along with the
bill payment slips in these boxes to be collected by third party agents[
24.Role of the RBI in encouraging e-payments
As the apex financial and regulatory institution in the country it is compulsory for the RBI to ensure that
the payments system in the country is as technologically advanced as possible and in view of this aim,
the RBI has taken several initiatives to strengthen the e-payments system in India and encourage people
to adopt it.
Raghuram Rajan, Ex-Governor, RBI, and Nandan Nilekani, Ex-Chairman, UIDAI and Advisor, NPCI, and
at the launch of Unified Payments Interface (UPI) in Mumbai.
Imagine paying for everyday purchases directly from your bank, without the need for carrying cash. The
RBI's new interface helps you do just that. Reserve Bank of India Governor Raghuram Rajan launched
the Unified Payments Interface (UPI) system, as its latest offering in boosting digital money transfers.
The interface has been developed by National Payments Corporation of India (NPCI), the umbrella
organisation for all retail payments in the country. The UPI seeks to make money transfers easy, quick
and hassle free.
The Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 2007 was a major step in this direction. It enables the

RBI to "regulate, supervise and lay down policies involving payment and settlement space in India."
Apart from some basic instructions to banks as to the personal and confidential nature of customer
payments, supervising the timely payment and settlement of all transactions, the RBI has actively
encouraged all banks and consumers to embrace e-payments.
In pursuit of the above-mentioned goal the RBI has granted NBFC’s (Non-Banking Financial
This website stores data such as
Companies) the permission to issue co branded credit cards forming partnerships with commercial
cokies to enable esential site
banks.
functionality, as wel as marketing,
The Kisan Credit Card Scheme was launched by NABARD in order to meet the credit needs of
personalization, and analytics. You
farmers, so that they can be free of paper money hassles and use only plastic money.
may change your setings at any time
A domestic card scheme known as RuPay has recently been started by the National Payments
or acept the default setings.
Corporation of India (NPCI),promoted by RBI and Indian Banks Association (IBA), inspired
by Unionpay in China, which will be promoting the use of cards ie. "plastic money". Initially
functioning as an NPO, Rupay will focus on potential customers from rural and semi-urban areas of
Privacy Policy
India. Rupay will have a much wider coverage than Visa, MasterCard or American Express cards
which have always been used for card-based settlements.
Marketing
The NREGA (National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme) introduced by the Government will

Personaleiznastuiorne rural employment in turn ensuring that the employees get wages. Each employee will have a
smart card functioning as his personal identification card, driver’s license, credit card which will also
Analytics
[2]
function as an electronic pass book, thus familiarising the rural populations with e-payments
Save Acept Al
  
Page 15
However, the Indian banking system suffers from some defects due to certain socio-cultural factors which
hampers the spread of the e-payments culture even though there are many effective electronic payment
channels and systems in place. Despite the infrastructure being there nearly 63% of all payments are still
made in cash. A relatively small percentage of the population pays their bills electronically and most of
that population is from urban India-the metropolitans. Also in some cases the transaction is done partially
online and partially "offline". The main reason for this apathy to switch to e-payments comes from lack of
awareness of the customer despite various efforts by the Government.
25. Block Chain Technology : ICICI Bank is the first bank in the country and among the first few globally
to exchange and
authenticate remittance transaction messages as well as original international trade documents related to
purchase order, invoice,
shipping & insurance, among others, electronically on block chain in real time.
The usage of block chain technology simplifies the process and makes it almost instant—to only a few
minutes. Typically, this
process takes a few days. The block chain application co-created by ICICI Bank replicates the paper-
intensive international trade
finance process as an electronic de centralised ledger, that gives all the participating entities including
banks the ability to access a
single source of information.
CODE NAME DIGITS
IFSC - Indian Financial System Code 11
MICR -Magnetic Ink Character Recognition 09
SWIFT-Society for worldwide interbank Financial Telecommunication ) 11
PAN- Permanent Account no. 10
UID /UAN – unique Identification Number 12
PIN – Postal Index Number 6
CIN-Cheque Identification Number 7
BIC ( BANK IDENTIFICATION NUMBER) 8
26. PREPAID PAYMENT INSTRUMENTS : Eligibility : Banks who comply with the eligibility criteria would
be permitted to issue all categories of pre-paid payment instruments. Non-Banking Financial Companies
(NBFCs) and other persons would be permitted to issue only semi-closed system payment instruments.
Capital requirements : Banks and Non-Banking Financial Companies which comply with the Capital
Adequacy requirements prescribed by Reserve Bank of India from time-to-time, shall be permitted to
issue pre-paid payment instruments. All other persons shall have a minimum paid-up capital of Rs 100
lakh and positive net owned funds. Safeguards against money laundering (KYC/AML/CFT) provisions -
The maximum value of any pre-paid payment instruments (where specific limits have not been prescribed
including the amount transferred) shall not exceed Rs 100,000/-.
This website stores data such as
Deployment of Money collected: Non-bank persons issuing payment instruments are required to maintain
cokies to enable esential site
their outstanding balance in an escrow account with any scheduled commercial bank subject to the
functionality, as wel as marketing,
following conditions:- The amount so maintained shall be used only for making payments to the
personalization, and analytics. You
participating merchant establishments. No interest is payable by the bank on such balances.
may change your setings at any time
Validity: All pre-paid payment instruments issued in the country shall have a minimum validity period of six
or acept the default setings.
months from the date of activation/issuance to the holder. The outstanding balance against any payment
instrument shall not be forfeited unless the holder is cautioned at least 15 days in advance as regards the
expiry of the validity of the payment instrument.
Privacy Policy
27.Money Transfer Service Scheme (MTSS) : The Reserve Bank has issued Master Directions relating
Marktoe tMinogney Transfer Service Scheme (MTSS), which is a quick and easy way of transferring personal
remittances from abroad to beneficiaries in India.
Personalization
MTSS can be used for inward personal remittances into India, such as, remittances towards family
maintenance and remittances favouring foreign tourists visiting India and not for outward remittance from
Analytics
India.
Save Acept Al
  
Page 16
The system envisages a tie-up between reputed money transfer companies abroad known as Overseas
Principals and agents in India known as Indian Agents who would disburse funds to beneficiaries in India
at ongoing exchange rates. The Indian Agents can in turn also appoint sub-agents to expand their
network. The Indian Agent is not allowed to remit any amount to the Overseas Principal. Under MTSS,
the remitters and the beneficiaries are individuals only.
The Reserve Bank of India may accord necessary permission (authorisation) to any person to act as an
Indian Agent under the Money Transfer Service Scheme. No person can handle the business of cross-
border money transfer to India in any capacity unless specifically permitted to do so by the RBI. To
become MTSS agent, min net owned funds Rs.50 lac. MTSS cap USD 2500 for individual remittance.
Max remittances 30 received by an individual in India in a calendar year. Min NW of overseas principal
USD 01 million, as per latest balance sheet.
28. IMPS
IMPS offer an instant,24*7 interbank electronic fund transfer service capable of processing person to
person, person to account and person to merchant remittances via mobile, internet and atms. It is a
multichannel and multidimensional platform that make the payments possible within fraction of seconds
with all the standards and integrity maintained for security required for even high worth transactions.
MMID - Mobile Money Identifier
Each MMID is a 7 digit code linked to a unique Mobile Number. Different MMIDs can be linked to same
Mobile Number.
Both Sender & Receiver have to register for Mobile Banking & get a unique ID called "MMID"
• Generation of MMID is a One-time process.
• Remitter (Sender) transfer funds to beneficiary (Receiver) using Mobile no. & 7digit MMID of
beneficiary.
IFS Code
11 digit alphanumeric number, available in the users Cheque book.
IMPS Fund transfer/Remittance options:
 Using Mobile number & MMID (P2P)
 Using Account number & IFS Code (P2A)
 Using Aadhaar number (ABRS)
 Using Mobile number & MMID (P2P)
 Customer Initiated - P2M(Push)
This website stores data such as
 Merchant Initiated - P2M(Pull)
cokies to enable esential site
functionality, as wel as marketing,
personalizaUtiosnin, ga nMdo abnialely nticusm. Yboeur & MMID (P2P)
may changeP ryeosuern stelyt,ti nIMgsP aSt aPneyr stiomne-to-Person (P2P) funds transfer requires the Remitter customer to make funds
or acept thtrea dnesffaeur ltu sseintgin gBse.neficiary Mobile Number and MMID. Both Remitter as well as Beneficiary needs to
register their mobile number with their respective bank account and get MMID, in order to send or receive
funds using IMPS.
Privacy Policy
Marketing
Personalization
Using Account number & IFS Code (P2A)
Analytics
Save Acept Al
  
Page 17
There may be cases where Remitter is enabled on Mobile Banking, but Beneficiary mobile number is not
registered with any bank account. In such cases, Remitter shall not be able to send money to the
Beneficiary using Mobile Number & MMID.
Hence on the merit of the feedback received from the banking community as well as to cater the above
mentioned need, the IMPS funds transfer has been made possible using Beneficiary account number and
IFS code as well, in addition to Beneficiary mobile number and MMID.
Customer Initiated - P2M(Push)
IMPS Merchant Payments (P2M - Person-to-merchant) service allows customers to make instant, 24*7,
interbank payments to merchants or enterprises via mobile phone. IMPS enables mobile banking users a
facility to make payment to merchants and enterprises, through various access channels such as Internet,
mobile Internet, IVR, SMS, USSD.
Sender enter details of merchant's (Customer initiated - Push)
• Merchant Mobile Number & MMID
• Amount to be transferred
• Payment reference (optional)
• Sender's M-PIN
Merchant Initiated - P2M(Pull)
IMPS Merchant Payments (P2M - Person-to-Merchant) service allows customers to make instant, 24*7,
interbank payments to merchants or enterprises via Mobile & Internet. IMPS enables mobile banking
users a facility to make payment to merchants and enterprises, through various access channels such as
Internet, mobile Internet, IVR, SMS, USSD.
Customer enter own details (Merchant Initiated - Pull)
• Customer own Mobile Number
• Customer own MMID
• OTP (generated from the Issuer Bank)
29.Aadhaar Based Remittance Service (ABRS)In ABRS, a remitter can initiate IMPS transaction using
the beneficiary's AADHAAR number, which acts as a financial address & which will be linked to the
beneficiaries account number. ABRS facilitates in simplifying the IMPS payment initiation process as in
this service the customer will have to input only AADHAAR number of the beneficiary for initiating an
This websitIeM sPtoSr etsra dnastaac stiuocnh. aAsnother important utility of this service will be in disbursal of subsidy payment i.e.
cokies to eEnleacbtlero ensics eBnetinael fsiitt eTransfer (EBT)/ Direct Benefit transfer (DBT) by the Government. ABRS will act as a
functionalityc,a atas lywset li na se xmpaarnkdeitningg f,inancial Inclusion reach.
personalization, and analytics. You
may change your setings at any time
or acept the default setings.
Query Service on Aadhaar Mapper (QSAM).
Privacy Policy
To facilitate the effective implementation of ABRS, a new feature is being added to the existing NUUP
Marketing
(USSD based platform on *99#) service. Under this new service, known as "Query Service on Aadhaar
Personalization
Mapper" the customer will be able to know : -
Analytics
• Whether his/her AADHAAR number is seeded/linked to any bank account number or not?
Save Acept Al
  
Page 18
• If yes, then with which bank and when was it last updated?
30.Various channels
IMPS transactions can be initiated from Mobile, ATMs and Internet banking channels.
Appropriate existing two-factor authentication method would be used for all the channels. The limit as
prescribed by the bank for these channels would apply while transferring money using either of these
channels.
While initiating an IMPS transaction using either ATM or Internet channel, mobile banking registration for
a remitting customer is not mandatory. Similarly, for customers receiving money using account
number/IFSC, or using AADHAAR number, mobile banking registration is not mandatory.
Mobile Channel
For transactions initiated using Mobile, transactions will be authenticated using mobile number & MPIN.
Mobile number + MPIN
ATM channel
Authentication will be done for remitting customers while using the ATM channel as follows:
Card + ATM PIN
Internet banking channel
Authentication will be done for remitting customers while using the Internet banking channel as follows:
User ID + Internet Banking Password/Transaction Password
31.NUUP (*99# Service on USSD platform)
One of the innovative payment service launched by NPCI includes *99# service, which works on
Unstructured Supplementary Service Data (USSD) channel. This service was launched envisioning the
potential of Mobile Banking and the need for immediate low value remittances which will help in financial
deepening and inclusion of underbanked society in the mainstream banking services. *99# service was
dedicated to the nation by the Honourable Prime Minister of India Shri Narendra Modi on 28th August
2014 as part of Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana (PMJDY).
This websit*e9 s9t#o rseesr vdiactea hsausch b aesen launched to take the banking services to every common man across the country.
cokies to eBnaanbklein egs csuesnttoiaml seirtse can avail this service by dialing *99#, a “Common number across all Telecom Service
functionalityP, raosv iwdeerls a s(T mSaPrsk)e”t inogn, their mobile phone and transact through an interactive menu displayed on the
personalizamtioonb,i laen ds carneaelny.t icKse. Yy osuervices offered under *99# service include, interbank account to account fund
may change your setings at any time
transfer, balance enquiry, mini statement besides host of other services. *99# service is currently offered
or acept the default setings.
by 43 leading banks & all GSM service providers and can be accessed in 12 different languages including
Hindi & English. *99# service is a unique interoperable direct to consumer service that brings together the
diverse ecosystem partners such as Banks & TSPs (Telecom Service Providers).
Privacy Policy
It is a common technology platform developed by NPCI which allows the Banks and TSPs to seamlessly
Marketing
integrate with each other to provide banking services to the customers at large over the mobile phones
Personalization
(basic as well as smartphone).
Analytics
The maximum limit of fund transfer per customer on NUUP is ₹5,000 per day.
Save Acept Al
  
Page 19
Convenience of *99*99# Service
It is a value added service from NPCI that facilitates the customers to check the status of his/her Aadhaar
number seeding/linking in the bank account. The service works across all GSM service providers and
brings together the diverse ecosystem partners such as Banks & TSPs (Telecom Service Providers).
Considering that various subsides and benefits of the State and Central Government schemes under the
Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) programme are being doled out basis the Aadhaar number of the
beneficiary; this service has proved to be a convenient mechanism for the users to ascertain his/her
Aadhaar seeding/ linking status in the bank account.
Currently, following Financial, Non-financial and Value Added Services (VAS) are offered through
*99# service:
A. Send Money
B. Request Money
C. Check Balance
D. My Profile
E. Pending request
F. Transactions
G. UPI PIN
Financial Services
A. Send Money : Users can send money to the beneficiary using one of the following
This website stores data such as 1 2. . M Aao db hil ae r N N Nu um mb be er r , ,
cokies to enable esential site
3. Payment address,
functionality, as wel as marketing,
4. saved beneficiary,
personalization, and analytics. You
5. IFSC code and Account Number
may change your setings at any time
or acept the default setings.
B. Request Money : Users can request money from another account holder using beneficiary’s
1. Registered mobile number or
2. Virtual Payment address.
Privacy Policy
MarketinCg. Check Balance: View available balance of the bank account linked to user’s mobile number.
Personalization
D. My Profile : User can mange the following settings in his profile
Analytics
Save Acept Al
  
Page 20
1. Change Bank Account
2. Change Language
3. My details
4. Payment Address
5. Manage Beneficiary
6. Merchant
7. De register
E. Pending request : pending requests for payments can be seen
F. Transactions : Previous Transactions can be checked
G. UPI PIN : UPIN can be set or changed
32.Value Added Services:
It is a value added service from NPCI that facilitates the customers to check the status of his/her
Aadhaar number seeding/linking in the bank account.
Main Features of *99# Service
 Works without Internet – Uses voice connectivity
 Round the clock availability (works even on holidays)
 Accessible through a common code *99# across all TSPs
 Works across all GSM service providers and mobile handsets
 Additional channel for banking and key catalyst for financial inclusion
 Service also offered through BC Micro ATMs to serve the rural populace
 No additional charges while roaming for using the service
 Round the clock availability to customers (works even on holidays)
 No need to install any application on mobile handset to use the service
This website stores data such as
cokies to eWnhabalte k einsde onfti aisl ssuitees are faced by the customer in using *99# service?
functionalityW, ahsil ew deol inasg mtraanrkseatcintigo,ns on *99#, customers may face following issues:
personaliza Mtio on b, ia len d h a an na dly st eic tss.: Y*o9u9# service is available only on GSM handsets.Handset Compatibility Issue:
may change your setings at any time
Though USSD based transactions works across all GSM handsets; however, owning to various reasons,
or acept the default setings.
sometimes few handsets do not support USSD service. Though, the numbers of such handset models is
few; still users are requested to check if there handset supports the USSD service (in case they are
facing problems while performing transaction).
Privacy Policy
Technical Error or Declined Request: Transaction not getting completed due to
Network / connectivity issues at TSPs or Banks end.
Marketing
Wrong User Inputs: Transaction will get declined if the user enters wrong information like IFS Code,
Personalization
Account number, UPIN etc.
Analytics
Save Acept Al
  
Page 21
32.Unified Payments Interface ("UPI")
Unified Payments Interface (UPI) is a payment system launched by
National Payments Corporation of India and regulated by Reserve Bank of India.
UPI is a payment system that allows money transfer between any two bank accounts by using a
smartphone.
UPI allows a customer to pay directly from a bank account to different merchants, both online and
offline, without the hassle of typing credit card details, IFSC code, or net banking/wallet passwords
One needs to download the app from Play Store and install in phone; Set app login; Create virtual
address; Add bank account; Set M-Pin; and Start transacting using UPI
It is safe as the customers only share a virtual address and provide no other sensitive information.
All merchant payments, remittances, bill payments among others can be done through UPI.
The per transaction limit is Rs.1 lakh.
A user can make an in-app payment for goods or services purchased online.
For instance a site allows purchase of a movie-on-demand.
User clicks buy, the site/app triggers the UPI payment link and is taken to the pay screen of the UPI
app, where the transaction information is verified and a click followed by entry of a secure PIN completes
the purchase.
26 major banks in India offer this facility to their customers.
The launch of the Unified Payments Interface ("UPI") by National Payments Corporation of India ("NPCI"),
has provided an impetus to India's move to incentivize digital payments with the vision to transform India
into a digitally empowered economy and reduce dependence on cash transactions. NPCI is the umbrella
body for all payment systems in India, which makes digital transactions as effortless as sending a text
message.
UPI makes cutting-edge changes by supporting real time transfer of money between accounts across
banks using smartphones by use of just one single interface besides creating interoperability and superior
customer experience. Embracing the smartphone boom in India and the inclination of customers to move
to digital mobile-based solutions, UPI addresses the challenges and limitations of the existing payment
systems, wherein customers are required to disclose sensitive financial details like bank account details,
IFSC code, credit/debit card details and sensitive PIN numbers while initiating transactions and juggle
between different mobile banking applications with their different user IDs and passwords.
This website stores data such as
cokies to enable esential site
Unified Payments Interface (UPI) is an instant payment system developed by the National Payments
functionality, as wel as marketing,
Corporation of India (NPCI), an RBI regulated entity. UPI is built over the IMPS infrastructure and allows
personalization, and analytics. You
you to instantly transfer money between any two parties' bank accounts.
may change your setings at any time
or acept the default setings.
UPI-PIN
UPI-PIN (UPI Personal Identification Number) is a 4-6 digit pass code you create/set during first time
registration with this App .You have to enter this UPI-PIN to authorize all bank transactions. If you
Privacy Policy
have already set up an UPI-PIN with other UPI Apps you can use the same on BHIM. (Note: Banks
Marketingissued MPIN is different from the UPI UPI-PIN, please generate a new UPI-PIN in the BHIM app)
Note: Please do not share your UPI-PIN with anyone. BHIM does not store or read your UPI-PIN
Personalization
details and your bank's customer support will never ask for it.
Analytics
Payment Address
Save Acept Al
  
Page 22
Payment Address is an Address which uniquely identifies a person's bank a/c. For instance, the
Payment Address for BHIM customers is in the format xyz@upi. You can just share your Payment
Address with anyone to receive payments (no need for bank account number/ IFSC code, etc.). You
can also send money to anyone by using their Payment Address. Note: Do not share your
confidential UPI PIN with anyone.
Virtual Payment address eliminates the need to provide sensitive information like a bank account
details, debit/credit card details and CVV numbers. Also, unlike a mobile wallet, a customer is not
required to set aside funds upfront in the mobile wallet setup with the service provider and all
transfers under the UPI are made from the bank account linked with your virtual payment address. A
virtual payment address is an identifier that will be mapped to a customers bank account, enabling
the bank providing the UPI services to process transactions through the bank account linked with the
respective virtual payment address.
Data Security
In terms of data security, UPI provides for a single click two-factor authorization, which implies that
with one click, the transaction is authenticated at 2 levels, compliant with the existing regulatory
guidelines issued by the Reserve Bank of India ("RBI"), without disclosing banking or personal
information. As UPI primarily works based on an individual's 'virtual payment address', one can send
and receive payments solely based on their 'virtual payment address' without providing any
additional details. For example if you need to make a payment to a merchant for purchases made at
a store, you will need to provide him only your 'virtual payment address', the merchant will then enter
your 'virtual payment address' into his UPI app, the UPI app will send an authentication messages to
the 'virtual payment address' linked to your mobile device, once your receive and acknowledge the
message by entering your password will the transaction be completed and the amount payable to
the merchant will be debited from your bank account.
Aggregator of all accounts
UPI acts as an aggregator of all accounts held by a customer enabling such customers to make
transactions from multiple accounts owned by them, from one single mobile application or web
interface and a customer is free to choose to use any bank's UPI application. Consequently, a
customer can own multiple virtual payment addresses wherein each virtual payment address can be
linked to a specific account and organise payments or collections, the way it suits them. Moreover,
special instructions like setting an upper limit for payments on certain handles, and restriction of
This website stormese rdcahtaan stsu cohr aosutlets at which a certain handle can be used, and standing payment instructions
cokies to enable esential site
make the whole process very useful to customers.
functionality, as wel as marketing,
The banks offering UPI services are required to be authorised by the RBI to provide mobile banking
personalization, and analytics. You
services. It is significant to note that even though the RBI has not issued any specific guidelines on
may change your setings at any time
the provision of UPI services, the transactions undertaken through use of UPI are required to be
or acept the default setings.
compliant with the guidelines issued by RBI including but not limited to, customer registration
process and KYC guidelines.
Privacy Policy
MarkHeotiwng UPI / BHIM at POS works?
Personalization
Analytics This innovative dynamic QR-code based solution uses the store's existing credit/debit card POS
terminal to enable UPI-based cashless payments.
Save Acept Al
  
Page 23
 When a customer requests UPI Payment mode, the cashier simply needs to select the 'UPI
Payment' option on his existing card POS terminal and inputs the relevant bill payment amount.
 This triggers the generation of a dynamic QR-code on the POS terminal screen itself which can
be scanned into any mobile-based UPI-apps like BHIM used by the customer.
 When scanned, the QR code automatically transfers relevant transaction details and displays it
on the customer's payment app for authorizing payment transfer.
 Once the payment transfer from customer's UPI-linked bank account to store's UPI-linked
account is completed, the payment solution triggers a settlement confirmation to the initiating in-
store POS terminal for printing out a transaction completion charge slip.
Benefits:
By enabling such a UPI payment confirmation on the merchant POS terminal itself, the new in-store UPI
interface addresses a long standing implementation hurdle holding back faster spread of UPI-acceptance
in large multi-lane retail stores.
With multiple checkout points, the cashiers in these stores have no direct means of payment receipt prior
to releasing the purchased goods to the customer. This is unlike a small single cashier store where such
a confirmation could be received via a simple text message to the single cashier's own mobile phone.
The new solution enables the crucial payment confirmation to be received on cashier-independent
infrastructure like the store POS terminal - a necessity for multi-cashier stores with high cashier churn.
Usage of a Dynamic QR with the merchant VPA (Virtual Private Address) or UPI ID and amount
embedded in it eliminates the need for typing in of the customer or merchant credentials in the POS.
This websitTeh sitso prerso cdeastas souffcehr sa sconvenience besides eliminating the cumbersome and error-prone process of typing
out credentials.
cokies to enable esential site
functionality, as wel as marketing,
personalization, and analytics. You
Key points about UPI
may change your setings at any time
or acept the default setings.
1. How is UPI different from IMPS?
Privacy Policy  UPI is providing additional benefits to IMPS in the following ways:
 Provides for a P2P Pull functionality
Marketing
 Simplifies Merchant Payments
Personalization Single APP for money transfer
 Single click two factor authentication
Analytics
Save Acept Al
  
Page 24
2. Does a customer need to register before remitting funds using UPI?
Yes, a customer needs to register with his/her PSP before remitting funds using UPI and link his
accounts
3. Does the customer need to register a beneficiary before transferring funds through UPI? What
details of beneficiary will be required?
No, registration of Beneficiary is not required for transferring funds through UPI as the fund would
be transferred on the basis of Virtual ID/ Account+IFSC / Mobile No+MMID / Aadhaar Number.
(Please check with your PSP and Issuing bank with regard to the services enabled on the App).
4. Can I link more than one bank account to the same virtual address?
Yes, several bank accounts can be linked to the same virtual address depending on the
functionalities being made available by the respective PSPs. If the selected Bank name to link
with UPI does not find your bank a/c, please ensure that the mobile number linked to your bank
account is same as the one verified in BHIM App. If it is not the same, your bank accounts will not
be fetched by the UPI platform. Only Savings and Current bank accounts are supported by BHIM.
5. What are the different channels for transferring funds using UPI?
 The different channels for transferring funds using UPI are:
 Transfer through Virtual ID
 Account Number + IFSC
 Mobile Number + MMID
 Aadhaar Number
 Collect / Pull money basis Virtual ID
6. What is the limit of fund transfer using UPI?
At present, the upper limit per UPI transaction is Rs. 1 Lakh.
This website stores data such as
cokies to enable esential site
33. Bharat Interface for Money (BHIM)
functionality, as wel as marketing,
The Bharat Interface for Money (BHIM) was rolled out by Prime Minister Narendra Modi on 30th
personalization, and analytics. You
December 2016, in an initiative to enable fast, secure and reliable cashless payments through mobile
may change your setings at any time
phones.
or acept the default setings.
BHIM is inter-operable with other Unified Payment Interface (UPI) applications and bank accounts,
and has been developed by the National Payments Corporation of India (NPCI).
The Android app is already available on the Google Play Store. As it is Aadhaarenabled, the app
Privacy Policy
puts an end to the fuss around other e-wallets. Moreover, an iOS version will be launched soon. One
must get their bank accounts registered along with a UPI Pin for their account.
Marketing
On the BHIM app, it would be <mobile number@upi> or <preferred user id@upi>. This user id would
be your primary address, which can be used to send or request money through other ids linked to it.
Personalization
The BHIM App supports about 35 banks.
Analytics
Save Acept Al
  
Page 25
Bharat Interface for Money (BHIM) is an app that lets you make simple, easy and quick payment
transactions. BHIM is a digital payments solution app based on the Unified Payments Interface (UPI) from
the National Payments Corporation of India (NPCI), the umbrella organisation for all retail payments
systems in India. You can easily make direct bank to bank payments instantly and collect money using just
Mobile number or Payment address.
BHIM being UPI-based, is linked directly to a bank account. All the payee needs is a bank account. If this
account is UPI activated, you can just ask for the payee’s Virtual Payment Address (VPA), and make the
payment to that account.Otherwise, there’s the option of IFSC or MMID for sending or receiving money. The
advantage is there’s no need to remember an account number, or to share it with anyone. The VPA is all
that is needed.
If you have signed up for UPI-based payments on your bank account, which is also linked to your mobile
phone number, you’ll be able to use the BHIM app to carry out digital transactions. Services available are as
follows:
The following are the features of BHIM:
1. Send Money: User can send money using a Virtual Payment Address (VPA), Account Number &
IFSC, Aadhaar Number or QR code.
2. Request Money: User can collect money by entering Virtual Payment Address (VPA). Additionally
through BHIM App, one can also transfer money using Mobile No. (Mobile No should be registered
with BHIM or *99# and account should be linked)
3. Scan & Pay: User can pay by scanning the QR code through Scan & Pay & generate your QR
option is also present.
4. Transactions: User can check transaction history and also pending UPI collect requests (if any)
and approve or reject. User can also raise complaint for the declined transactions by clicking on
Report issue in transactions.
5. Profile: User can view the static QR code and Payment addresses created or also share the QR
code through various messenger applications like WhatsApp, Email etc. available on phone and
This website storesd odwatnal osaudc hth aes QR code.
cokies to enable esential site
6. Bank Account: User can see the bank account linked with his/her BHIM App and set/change the
functionality, as wel as marketing,
UPI PIN. User can also change the bank account linked with BHIM App by clicking Change
personalization, and analytics. You
may change your saectctiongusn ta pt raonvyid teimde in Menu and can also check Balance of his/her linked Bank Account by clicking
or acept the defau“Rlt EseQtUtinEgSsT. BALANCE”
7. Language: Up to 8 regional languages (Tamil, Telugu, Bengali, Malayalam, Oriya, Gujarati,
Privacy Policy Kannada ,Hindi) available on BHIM to improve user experience.
Marketing
8. Block User: Block/Spam users who are sending you collect requests from illicit sources.
Personalization
9. Privacy: Allow a user to disable and enable mobilenumber@upi in the profile if a secondary VPA is
Analytics
created (QR for the disabled VPA is also disabled).
Save Acept Al
  
Page 26
g
Unique features of BHIM:
QR code based scan & pay option available, Generate your own QR code option is also

available
Option to save your beneficiaries for future references

Access transaction history and Request Balance anytime

Create, reset or change UPI PIN

Report Issue and call Bank facilities are given to lodge complaints

FAQ section is created in the app to answer all the queries reg. BHIM

Available in 2 languages English and Hindi

Benefits of BHIM:
Single App for sending and receiving money and making merchant payments

Go cashless anywhere anytime

Added security of Single click 2 factor authentication

Seamless money collection through single identifiers, reduced risks, real time

Mobile no. or Name used to create VIRTUAL PAYMENT ADDRESS (VPA)

Best answer to Cash on Delivery hassle

Send and collect using VIRTUAL PAYMENT ADDRESS (VPA) or A/c no & IFSC.

Payments through single app in your favourite language.

24X7, 365 days instantaneous money transfer

Transfer Limits:
Maximum limit per transaction is Rs. 10,000 per transaction

Maximum limit per day is Rs. 20,000

There is limit of 20 transactions per account per bank.

This website stores data such as
cokies to enable esential site
functionalityC, haas rwgeelsl afos rm uasriknegti nBgH,IM:
personalization, and analytics. You
For Smart Phones with Internet option BHIM can be executed via the app (available in Play store and
may change your setings at any time
coming soon for iPhone app store), whereas for feature phones, BHIM can be executed via phone dialler
or acept the default setings.
using *99# option.
The charges for BHIM is one time hard binding SMS charges depending on the mobile operator (Standard
Privacy PolSicMyS charges of your operator).For *99# the charges are Rs.0.50/- for one transaction.
Marketing
HOW TO USE BHIM APP:
Personalization
AnalFyitricsst Time User:
Step 1: Download and Install BHIM app from Google Play store/Apple App Store.
Save Acept Al
  
Page 27
g
Step 2: Select your preferred language.
Step 3: Select SIM card which has the mobile number registered with your respective bank.
Step 4: Set the application passcode required to enter the app.
Step 5: Link your bank accounts using bank account option.
Step 6: Set your UPI PIN by providing last 6 digits of debit card and expiry date of debit card.
Step 7 (Optional): Create another virtual payment address (VPA) in the profile section. Automatically
mobilenumber@upi will be your default virtual payment address (VPA) (eg. 9876543210@upi)
Note: 2 virtual payment address (VPA)s are allowed per user 1. mobilenumber@upi and 2. name@upi)
Step 8: Set one virtual payment address (VPA) as a primary (default) virtual payment address (VPA) (Eg.
name@upi can be primary virtual payment address (VPA) making it easy to share with others).
Step 9: Click on send and enter the virtual payment address (VPA)/Account number+ IFSC/Aadhaar
number and Scan or Pay option of the person to whom you want to send money.
Step 10: Enter the UPI Pin you set earlier to authenticate the transaction.
Step 11: Check transaction history to see the status of the transaction.
Customer Referral Scheme –
The scheme is intended to incentivize an existing user of BHIM to bring new users on the BHIM platform
and encourage the new user to do transaction using BHIM with other users or by referring new users on
BHIM. Hence, the bonus will be paid to both the referrer and the new user of BHIM (referee) and the
referral will be considered successful only after 3 successful financial transactions (to any valid UPI user –
“valid receiver”) performed by the referee.
The Scheme construct as -
1. An existing BHIM user (Referrer) to refer BHIM application to new user (Referee)
2. New BHIM user (Referee) initiates access to BHIM app or by dialing *99# from his/her mobile
number registered with bank and complete on-boarding process on BHIM i.e. downloading,
registering and fetching the bank account
This website sto3r.e s daNtae wsu BchH IaMs user (Referee) completes his/her first eligible financial transaction with any unique
user
cokies to enable esential site
functionality, as wel as marketing,
To establish the referral relationship between referrer and referee –
personalization, and analytics. You
may change your setings at any time
1. Referee needs to enter the referral code (mobile number) of the referrer at the time doing the
or acept the default setings.
first financial transaction with any unique user (to any valid UPI user including BHIM)
Privacy Policy 2. The referral code field (as an option) will appear on the transaction page and will be visible only
to the new BHIM user (referee) at the time of their first financial transaction process
Marketing
3. In case of *99#, the referee will choose the option of entering the referral code (as an option) at
Personalization
the time of on-boarding
Analytics
4. System shall validate that if the referrer mobile number is valid BHIM registered
Save Acept Al
  
Page 28
g
5. On completion of minimum 3 unique successful transactions totaling to Rs. 50 to any 3 unique
users (either P2P or P2M), the referrer and the referee will be notified about the bonus amount
via notification in BHIM app. In this the referrer and referee has to be on BHIM user, however
he can perform financial transaction with any valid UPI user / merchant.
6. The bonus will be credited to the bank accounts of the referrer and the referee after meeting
the eligibility criteria (as stated below)
Merchant Incentive Scheme –
1. Merchant can download and install the BHIM App or *99# in his phone and will have an option
to self-declare himself/herself as merchant by clicking on “I Am A Merchant’ tab in BHIM App.
2. Once the user clicks on the “I AM A MERCHANT” tab, he/she has to fill in appropriate details
asked by the BHIM App - business name, contact number (auto populated), merchant category
(drop-down), merchant address, city, pin-code, account type
3. The scheme applies to all merchants who receive payments on BHIM App or *99#
4. Reward section in BHIM app would display the cashback received to the merchant.
5. Merchant can use any mode available on BHIM [QR Code, VPA, Mobile number, or Aadhaar
number] to collect the payments from their customers. Both push and pull based payments
shall qualify for this payments.
6. On achieving the cashback incentive slab as defined for the merchants, NPCI initiates the
cashback process using NACH platform and the merchant is notified of the cashback via
notification in BHIM app
34. National Automated Clearing House (NACH)
National Payments Corporation of India (NPCI) has implemented “National Automated Clearing House
(NACH)” for Banks, Financial Institutions, Corporates and Government a web based solution to facilitate
interbank, high volume, electronic transactions which are repetitive and periodic in nature.
This website sEtCorSe sw dilal tbae s ruecphla acsed with NACH from 1.4.2016.
cokies to enaNbAleC eHs sseysntteiaml s witeill provide a national footprint and is expected to cover the entire core banking enabled
bank branches spread across the geography of the country irrespective of the location of the bank branch.
functionality, as wel as marketing,
NACH System can be used for making bulk transactions towards distribution of subsidies, dividends,
personalization, and analytics. You
interest, salary, pension etc. and also for bulk transactions towards collection of payments pertaining to
may change your setings at any time
telephone, electricity, water, loans, investments in mutual funds, insurance premium etc.
or acept the default setings.
NACH’s Aadhaar Payment Bridge (APB) System has been channelizing the Government subsidies and
benefits to the intended beneficiaries using their Aadhaar numbers. The APB System links the
Government Departments and their sponsor banks on one side and beneficiary banks and beneficiary on
Privacy Policy
the other hand.
Marketing
Personalization
Analytics
Save Acept Al
  
Page 29
g
35. White Label ATM and Brown Label ATM
Sailent features of WHITE LABEL ATM (WLA) ,BROWN LABEL ATM (BLA) comaprision in each
point
1. ATMs set up, owned and operated by non-banks and authorized under Payment & Settlement Systems
Act, 2007 by the Reserve Bank of India. Any non-bank entity with net worth of Rs.100 crores can apply
for installation White Label ATMs. ATMs where hardware and the lease of the ATM machine is owned by
a service provider. Cash management and connectivity to banking networks is provided by a sponsor
bank. No instructions on net-worth requirements for BLA entities.
2. Logo displayed on ATM machine and in ATM premises pertain to WLA Operator (WLAO). Logo
displayed on ATM machine/ premises is of Sponsor Bank.
3. Services available include:
Account Information
Mini/Short Statement
PIN change
Request for Cheque Book
Services available include:
Account Information
Mini/Short Statement
PIN change
Request for Cheque Book
Cash deposit
4. Contact number of officials /toll free numbers/ helpline numbers are to be displayed for lodging any
complaint regarding failed/disputed transactions. Contact number of officials of the Bank /toll free
numbers/ helpline numbers are to be displayed for lodging any complaint regarding failed/disputed
transactions.
5. The Grievance Redressal Mechanism available to users of WLA is same as that available to users of
banks’ ATMs for failed/disputed transactions. The primary responsibility to redress grievances of
customers relating to failed transactions at such WLAs will vest with the card issuing bank. The sponsor
bank will provide necessary support by ensuring WLAO makes available relevant records and information
to the Issuing bank. The Grievance Redressal Mechanism available to users of BLA is same as that
available to users of banks’ ATMs for failed/disputed transactions.
6. Sponsor Bank provides the cash. The Bank provides the cash for the ATMs to the outsourced agency.
7. RBI provides license to White Label Companies. RBI is not involved directly, as the banks have
outsourced the contract.
36. Desired Features of Mobile Banking
This website stores data such as
Apps are fast becoming the primary way to interact with consumers - When banks first launched apps,
cokies to enable esential site
they were convenient tools to check your balance and keep on top of your spending. However,
functionality, as wel as marketing,
consumers are expecting - and banks are delivering - ever more functionality. Particularly with younger
personalization, and analytics. You
consumers, apps are becoming critical to attracting and retaining consumers. The benchmarks for
may change your setings at any time
ranking a mobile banking are;
or acept the default setings.
Privacy Policy range of touchpoints,
enrollment and login,
Marketing account information,
Personalization
transactional functionality,
Analytics service features,
Save Acept Al
  
Page30
Page 30
cross channel guidance, and
marketing and sales.
Some of the important desired features in a mobile banking app across the world and India are as follows:
Download apps for a range of smartphone operating systems. This is one of the greatest challenges -to
make the app work across operating systems with various versions of each. Downloadable smartphone
apps let digital banking teams use device-specific features to create a smoother and more intuitive
experience for mobile banking customers. Although some operating systems are more important in some
countries than others, the major four operating systems are - Android, BlackBerry OS, iOS, and Windows
Phone.
Easily complete banking tasks via a mobile website. Many customers use the browser on their mobile
device to access their bank account information, pay bills on the run, or make other mobile
transactions — and today they expect to perform these tasks without the hassle of pinching and zooming
their way through a mobile-unfriendly web experience.
Interact with the bank via SMS. Most banks report falling use of SMS text messaging relative to other
mobile banking touchpoints. Yet some consumers — especially those who do not have a smartphone —
continue to use text banking.
Enroll in mobile banking directly from their smartphone. As younger generations start opening their first
bank accounts, the proportion of customers who are mobile-first and mobile-only will rise. Digital banking
teams need to enable customers to register for digital banking directly from their mobile devices — rather
than forcing them to sign up for online banking first.
Understand how to use mobile banking. As content and functionality become more extensive, with
This website stores data such as
leading banks offering regular mobile updates, it’s important that digital banking teams communicate
cokies to ethneasbele i mespsreonvteiaml esnitets and guide new users through how to use mobile banking.
functionality, as wel as marketing,
personalization, and analytics. You
may changeE aysoiulyr saectctiensgss saet caunryit yti maend privacy content. Many customers who are just starting to use mobile banking
or acept thweo drreyfa aublto suet tptirnivgas.cy and security, while others might want to be reassured in specific situations. This area
still remains a weak spot for many retail banks.
Privacy Policy
Get valuable content and account information pre-login. Digital banking teams have recognized that
Marketing
customers don’t need to be logged in for every banking task and that many like the convenience of
Personalization
accessing simple information without needing to enter a password. Log in easily. Banks must make the
mobile banking login process as painless as possible, without compromising security. Leading banks do
Analytics
this by using multifactor authentication the first time customers use the app, then letting them use a
simplified login subsequently. Many banks offer convenient features, such as a “remember this device”
Save Acept Al
  
Page31
Page 31
option and the ability to save user names, and they let users opt into an abbreviated login process using a
simple PIN code rather than entering a full alphanumeric password.
Log in easily. Banks must make the mobile banking login process as painless as possible, without
compromising security. Leading banks do this by using multifactor authentication the first time customers
use the app, then letting them use a simplified login subsequently. Many banks offer convenient features,
such as a “remember this device” option and the ability to save user names, and they let users opt into an
abbreviated login process using a simple PIN code rather than entering a full alphanumeric password.
Quickly work out how to achieve their mobile banking goals. The mobile screen customers land on
immediately after logging in is a crucial part of their mobile banking experience. Digital banking teams
must design screens that make it easy for customers to complete the tasks they logged into mobile
banking to do. Most leading banks display prominent one-click links to the most common tasks directly on
the home screen.
Quickly and conveniently find transactions. Different customers will search their transaction history with
different search tools, according to personal preferences: Many banks are expanding the transaction
history tools available via mobile. See an accurate forecast for their spending. A growing number of banks
provide customers with a “future view” of their upcoming payments and transfers. And some are even
using predictive tools to include transactions the customer hasn’t yet set up.
Better understand their financial lives with embedded money management tools. Digital money
management will ultimately be embedded at the heart of digital banking. Not all money management
features make sense for mobile touchpoints, but digital teams should offer simple, integrated, and
contextual tools that help customers quickly and easily get the information they want or take the action
they need.
Move money without hassles. Overall, the banks offer strong and easy mobile money movement
This website stores data such as
functionality such as account-to-account and P2P money transfers.
cokies to enable esential site
functionality, as wel as marketing,
personalization, and analytics. You
Send money to other people without sensitive personal details- This is one of the important desired
may change your setings at any time
features in most of the countries.
or acept the default setings.
Buy items in stores without plastic. It is observed that digital wallets integrating offers, coupons, point-of-
Privacy Policy
sale (POS) payments, and loyalty rewards are poised to transform the way consumers shop and make
Markpeatyinmgents.
Personalization
AnalSyoticlvse account issues within the mobile app. Self-service features let a customer initiate or complete a
request without having to interact with a bank employee. Functionality that lets a customer dispute a card
Savetransaction,A recpcoerptt f rAaluld, or order a new debit card is not widely available on banks’ mobile banking apps.
  
Page32
Page 32
Set up, receive, and manage alerts. Alerts continue to offer great value to customers. Just a few years
ago, customers were content to set up and manage alerts via the bank’s secure website and receive the
alerts via SMS or email. But behavior is changing with the mobile mind shift, and an
increasing number of banks are differentiating themselves by offering alerts delivery and management
within the mobile banking app.
Find branches and ATMs. Most of the banks evaluated make it easy for customers to find nearby
branches and ATMs, including key information such as hours of operation and providing step-by-step
directions.
Easily apply for a new product, account, or service. Application abandonment has been an issue for
digital sales teams at banks for years, and the physical limitations of mobile devices can amplify the
problem. Someone trying to open a new account is more likely to give up if he or she needs to pinch and
zoom through the task flow while also entering information into dozens of data entry fields. So cross-
selling effectively means making buying as easy and quick as possible for a customer. For example,
mBank has developed simplified product applications with two-step task flows and embedded them within
mobile banking.
36.INTERNET SERVICE PROVIDERS / HOSTING / BANDWIDTH / DATA DOWNLOAD & UPLOAD
In a typical world scenario, we come across Internet Service Providers (ISPs) advertising about “high
speed internet”. But when we look at our own internet connections, the download speeds seems to be far
below compared to what has been advertised. So what did your ISP actually mean by “Connection
Speed”? Is “Connection Speed” totally different from “Download Speed”?
This website stores data such as
cokies to enable esential site
functionality, as wel as marketing,
Connection Speeds and Download Speeds
personalization, and analytics. You
may change your setings at any time
or acept the default setings.
People often confuse connection speed with downloading speed. Though both of these terms refer fairly
to the same thing, their interpretation is slightly different from one another.
Privacy Policy
MarkCeotinnngection speed (or Internet Bandwidth) refers to the raw data transfer rate of the connection provided
by your ISP. This is the property that is usually advertised and can vary largely among different providers
Personalization
and data plans. Nowadays, this figure is usually expressed in terms of Kbps (Kilobit per Second) or Mbps
Anal(yMtiecsgabit per Second).
Save Acept Al
  
Page33
Page 33
On the other hand, when we download files from the internet, the same data transfer rate is interpreted as
Download Speed. Download speed is usually measured in KBps (Kilobyte per second).
A Typical Scenario
Say you have a 1 Mbps Internet connection. With such a connection speed, you might expect to
download files at a rate of around 1 MB per second, but when you actually download a file, the download
speed only reaches up to 100 – 120 KB per second.
Where’s the catch? If connection speed and download speed are fairly one and the same, as we
mentioned earlier, then we should be ideally getting the same speed for connection and download. So
what’s missing here?
Actually, connection and download speeds are measured in two different units, so even though these
measurements refer to the same thing, their interpreted values turn out to be quite different.
Connection v/s Download (Units)
Unit used for Connection Speed: Kbps (Kilobit per Second), Mbps (Megabit per Second), Gbps (Gigabit
per Second) and so on…
Unit used for Download Speed: KBps (Kilobyte per Second), MBps (Megabyte per Second) and so on.
Relation between bit and byte
This website stores data such as
cokies to enable esential site
functionality, as wel as marketing,
1 byte = 8 bit1 kilobyte (KB) = 8 kilobit (Kb)
personalization, and analytics. You
may change your setings at any time
or acept the default setings.
Why different units are used for measuring connection and download speed?
Privacy Policy
A Bit is the most fundamental unit of representing data. That is why it was adopted as a standard for
Marketing
measuring the raw data transfer rate, which refers to the connection speed. Hence, connection speeds
are measured in Megabit per second (Mbps).
Personalization
Analytics
Save Acept Al
  
Page34
Page 34
But a bit in itself is quite meaningless. The data in your computer is stored in the form of 8 bit blocks,
known as a byte. So when you download any file from the internet, it is generally represented in Byte.
Hence, download speed is usually measured in Kilobyte per second (KBps).
The noteworthy point here is the difference between bit and byte as used in the two units. Connection
speed is represented with a (small) ‘b’ for bit while download speed takes a (capital) ‘B’ for Byte. Let us
have a deeper look at the two units.
1 Megabyte (MB) = 8 Megabit (Mb)
1 Megabyte (MB) = 1024 Kilobyte (KB)
8 Megabit (Mb) = 1024 Kilobyte (KB)
Therefore,1 Megabit (Mb)= [1024/8 =] 128 Kilobyte (KB)
So, in a 1 Mbps connection, your maximum download speed would be 128 KBps (=1Mbps). And this
convention kind of suits the ISPs too, as it helps them to lure consumers into visually greater figures.
Factors affecting Download Speeds
So, we should get a maximum download speed of 128 KBps on a 1 Mbps connection. But practically, we
would only be able to download files at 80 KBps – 120 KBps on average. The fall in the download rate
can be attributed to several external and internal factors.
This website stores data such as
cokies to enable esential site
functionalityE, xatse rwneall faasc tmorasr kaeffteincgti,ng download speeds
personalization, and analytics. You
may change your setings at any time
or acept the default setings.
Your downloading speed is affected by several server-side factors:
Privacy Policy
Marketing
Personalization
Analytics
Save Acept Al
  
Page35
Page 35
37.Downloading via Download Managers
Regular downloaders that are integrated with web browsers download files through a single connection.
To enhance downloading speeds, third party download manager applications (For example; IDM, DAP,
Orbit Downloader, etc.) are available which are able to set up multiple connections in parallel to download
a file. Of course, this feature can be primarily controlled by server restrictions. However, if allowed,
download managers can simultaneously download several parts of the file and hence improve the overall
downloading speed.
38.Downloading from Torrents
Torrent downloads work in a different way than regular downloads. Instead of the conventional client-
server model, this technology is based on a peer-to-peer model (P2P). In this model, data can flow
universally among number of connected users, known as peers. A file being shared on P2P is distributed
across the entire network.
There are two types of Peer –Seeder and Leecher. Seeders are users uploading data in the network, and
leechers are those who are downloading it. In a torrent network, if there are more number of leechers
than seeders, downloading speed might decrease as there are more nodes downloading the data than
those who are uploading. On the other hand, if there are more number of seeders, downloading speed
might be higher.
Torrent downloads can, in fact, be faster than regular downloads, since there are numerous active
parallel connections to download parts of the data. Nodes can connect to a torrent network via BitTorrent
clients. Once peers complete download, they can also seed it for other leechers to download from.
This website stores data such as
You can find out your own connection speed by performing an online test. Speedtest.net is a good web
cokies to enable esential site
application to rate your connection in terms of Download and Upload speed.
functionality, as wel as marketing,
personalization, and analytics. You
may change your setings at any time
Connection speed and download speed are fairly the same thing, only measured in different units. So, to
or acept the default setings.
get download speed (in KBps) from connection speed (in Mbps), first multiply the connection speed by
1024 to convert from Megabit (Mb) to Kilobit (Kb), and then divide by 8 to convert it from Kilobit (Kb) to
Privacy PolKiciylobyte (KB).
Marketing
Personalization
Analytics
Save Acept Al
  
Page36
Page 36
39.Cheque Truncation System (CTS) or Image-based Clearing System (ICS), in India, is a project of the
Reserve Bank of India (RBI), commencing in 2010, for faster clearing of cheques. CTS is based on a
cheque truncation or online image-based cheque clearing system where cheque images and magnetic
ink character recognition (MICR) data are captured at the collecting bank branch and transmitted
electronically.
Cheque truncation means stopping the flow of the physical cheques issued by a drawer to the drawee
branch. The physical instrument is truncated at some point en-route to the drawee branch and an
electronic image of the cheque is sent to the drawee branch along with the relevant information like the
MICR fields, date of presentation, presenting banks etc. This would eliminate the need to move the
physical instruments across branches, except in exceptional circumstances, resulting in an effective
reduction in the time required for payment of cheques, the associated cost of transit and delays in
processing, etc., thus speeding up the process of collection or realization of cheques.
CTS has been implemented in New Delhi, Chennai and Mumbai with effect from February 1, 2008,
September 24, 2011 and April 27, 2013 respectively. After migration of the entire cheque volume from
MICR system to CTS, the traditional MICR-based cheque processing has been discontinued across the
country. The CTS-2010 compliant cheques are both image friendly and have enhanced security features.
All banks providing cheque facility to their customers have been advised to issue only 'CTS-2010'
standard cheques. Cheques not complying with CTS-2010 standards would be cleared at less frequent
intervals i.e. weekly once from November 1, 2014 onwards.
Banks derive multiple benefits through the implementation of CTS, like a faster clearing cycle meaning
technically possible realization of proceeds of a cheque within the same day. It offers better reconciliation/
verification, better customer service and enhanced customer window. Operational efficiency provides a
direct boost to bottom lines of banks as clearing of local cheques is a high cost low revenue activity.
Besides, it reduces operational risk by securing the transmission route. Centralized image archival
systems ensure that data storage and retrieval is easy. Reduction of manual tasks leads to reduction of
errors. Real-time tracking and visibility of the cheques, less frauds with secured transfer of images to the
This website stores data such as
RBI are other benefits that banks derive from this solution.
cokies to enable esential site
40.NG RTGS-Next Generation RTGS
functionality, as wel as marketing,
personalization, and analytics. You
may change your setings at any time
NG-RTGS has been introduced in India since October 2013. With its advanced liquidity and queue
or acept the default setings.
management features, the new RTGS system is expected to significantly improve the efficiency of
financial markets. He hoped the new RTGS system would be such a driver for India‘s financial system.
Privacy Policy
Marketing
Reportedly the first in the world to be built on ISO 20022 messaging standards, the new RTGS system is
highly scalable and will have several new functionalities. These include advance liquidity features,
Personalization
including gridlock resolution mechanism and hybrid settlement facility, facility to accept future value dated
Analtyraticnssactions, options to process multi-currency transactions, etc. These functionalities, as and when
made available for use, will be notified to the participants.
Save Acept Al
  
Page37
Page 37
The new ISO 20022 compliant RTGS system provides three access options to participants thick-client,
Web-API (through INFINET or any other approved network) and Payment Originator module. The
participants can decide the mode of participation in the system based on the volume of transactions and
the cost of setting up the infrastructure.
The RTGS infrastructure in India is critical in facilitating the orderly settlement of payment obligations. The
role of central banks as operators of large-value payment systems is important in the context of the
broader role of the central bank in a nation’s financial system insofar as it offers safety net attributes by
providing final settlement in central bank money.
RTGS is a critical Financial market Infrastructure (FMI) operated by the Reserve Bank of India and it will
be assessed against the Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems and the International
Organisation of Securities Commissions (CPSS-IOSCO) Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures
applicable to FMIs.
With implementation of the new RTGS system, the existing RTGS system will cease to be operational.
Further, the RTGS System Regulations 2013would replace the RTGS (Membership) Business Operating
Guidelines, 2004 and RTGS (Membership) Regulations, 2004.
41.National Electronic Fund Transfer (NEFT)
National Electronic Funds Transfer (NEFT) is a nation-wide payment system maintained by Reserve Bank
of India (RBI), facilitating one-to-one funds transfer. Under this Scheme, individuals, firms and corporates
can electronically transfer funds from any bank branch to any individual, firm or corporate having an
account with any other bank branch in the country participating in the Scheme. Against the principle of
RTGS which is a Real-Time as well as Gross Settlement system, NEFT settlement happens in batches.
This website stores data such as
cokies to enable esential site
functionalityF, oars b weeinlg a ps amrta orkfe thtineg N, EFT funds transfer network, a bank branch has to be NEFT- enabled. The list of
personalizabtiaonnk, -awnids ea bnraalyntcichse. sY owuhich are participating in NEFT is provided in the website of Reserve Bank of India.
may change your setings at any time
or acept the default setings.
Individuals, firms or corporates maintaining accounts with a bank branch can transfer funds using NEFT.
Privacy PolEicvyen such individuals who do not have a bank account (walk-in customers) can also deposit cash at the
NEFT-enabled branches with instructions to transfer funds using NEFT. However, such cash remittances
Marketing
will be restricted to a maximum of Rs.50,000/- per transaction. Such customers have to furnish full details
Persinonclauldiziantgio ncomplete address, telephone number, etc. NEFT, thus, facilitates originators or remitters to
initiate funds transfer transactions even without having a bank account.
Analytics
Save Acept Al
  
Page38
Page 38
Individuals, firms or corporates maintaining accounts with a bank branch can receive funds through the
NEFT system. It is, therefore, necessary for the beneficiary to have an account with the NEFT enabled
destination bank branch in the country.
The NEFT system also facilitates one-way cross-border transfer of funds from India to Nepal. This is
known as the Indo-Nepal Remittance Facility Scheme. A remitter can transfer funds from any of the
NEFT-enabled branches in to Nepal, irrespective of whether the beneficiary in Nepal maintains an
account with a bank branch in Nepal or not. The beneficiary would receive funds in Nepalese Rupees.
Limit on the amount that could be transferred using NEFT – No. There is no limit – either minimum or
maximum – on the amount of funds that could be transferred using NEFT. However, maximum amount
per transaction is limited to Rs.50,000/- for cash-based remittances within India and also for remittances
to Nepal under the Indo-Nepal Remittance Facility Scheme.
Operating hours of NEFT - Unlike Real-time gross settlement (RTGS), fund transfers through the NEFT
system do not occur in real-time basis. NEFT settles fund transfers in half-hourly
batches with 23 settlements occurring between 8:00 AM and 7:00 PM on week days. Transfers initiated
outside this time period are settled at the next available window. No settlements are made on the second
and fourth Saturday of the month or on Sundays.
Process of NEFT system - An individual / firm / corporate intending to originate transfer of funds through
NEFT has to fill an application form providing details of the beneficiary (like name of the beneficiary,
name of the bank branch where the beneficiary has an account, IFSC of the beneficiary bank branch,
This website stores data such as
account type and account number) and the amount to be remitted. Customers enjoying net banking
cokies to efancaibliltey eosffseernetdia bl ysi tteheir bankers can also initiate the funds transfer request online. Some banks offer the
functionalityN, EasF Tw efalc ailsit ym eavrekent tinhgro,ugh the ATMs.
personalization, and analytics. You
may change your setings at any time
or acept the default setings.
The originating bank branch prepares a message and sends the message to its pooling centre (also
called the NEFT Service Centre). The pooling centre forwards the message to the NEFT Clearing Centre
Privacy Pol(icoyperated by National Clearing Cell, Reserve Bank of India, Mumbai) to be included for the next available
batch.
Marketing
Personalization
AnalTyhtices Clearing Centre sorts the funds transfer transactions destination bank-wise and prepares accounting
entries to receive funds from the originating banks (debit) and give the funds to the destination banks
Save Acept Al
  
P 39
Page 39
(credit). Thereafter, bank-wise remittance messages are forwarded to the destination banks through their
pooling centre (NEFT Service Centre).
Finally, the destination banks receive the inward remittance messages from the Clearing Centre and pass
on the credit to the beneficiary customers’ accounts.
IFSC- IFSC or Indian Financial System Code is an alpha-numeric code that uniquely identifies a bank-
branch participating in the NEFT system. This is an 11 digit code with the first 4 alpha characters
representing the bank, and the last 6 characters representing the branch. The 5th character is 0 (zero).
IFSC is used by the NEFT system to identify the originating / destination banks / branches and also to
route the messages appropriately to the concerned banks / branches.
Acknowledgement by SMS - In case of successful credit to the beneficiary's account, the bank which had
originated the transaction is expected to send a confirmation to the originating customer (through SMS or
e-mail) advising of the credit as also mentioning the date and time of credit. For the purpose, remitters
need to provide their mobile number / e-mail-id to the branch at the time of originating the transaction.
Tracking an NEFT transaction - The remitter can track the NEFT transaction through the originating bank
branch or its CFC using the unique transaction reference number provided at the time of initiating the
funds transfer. It is possible for the originating bank branch to keep track and be aware of the status of
the NEFT transaction at all times.
Benefits of using NEFT:
This website stores data such as
cokies to eNnEaFbTle oefsfesresn mtiaal nsyit eadvantages over the other modes of funds transfer:
functionality, as wel as marketing,
personalization, and analytics. You
may change your setings at any time
or acept the defaTuhlte s eretminigttse.r need not send the physical cheque or Demand Draft to the beneficiary. The
beneficiary need not visit his / her bank for depositing the paper instruments.
Privacy Policy
Marketing
The beneficiary need not be apprehensive of loss / theft of physical instruments or the likelihood of
Personalization
fraudulent encashment thereof.
Analytics
Cost effective.
Save Acept Al
  
P 40
Page 40
Credit confirmation of the remittances sent by SMS or email.
Remitter can initiate the remittances from his home / place of work using the internet banking also.
Near real time transfer of the funds to the beneficiary account in a secure manner.
NEFT has gained popularity due to its saving on time and the ease with which the transactions can be
concluded. Introduction of Immediate Payment Services (IMPS) by 41.National Payments Corporation of
India (NPCI), which is gaining popularity reduces the burden on NEFT systems at RBI.
National Payments Corporation of India (NPCI) – Its Products & Services
National Payments Corporation of India (NPCI), is the umbrella organisation for all retail payment systems
in India, which aims to allow all Indian citizens to have unrestricted access to e-payment services.
Founded in 2008, NPCI is a not-for-profit organisation registered under section 8 of the Companies Act
2013. The organisation is owned by a consortium of major banks,[3] and has been promoted by the
country’s central bank, the Reserve Bank of India. Its recent work of developing Unified Payments
Interface aims to move India to a cashless society with only digital transactions.
It has successfully completed the development of a domestic card payment network called RuPay,
reducing the dependency on international card schemes. The RuPay card is now accepted at all the
ATMs, Point-of-Sale terminals and most of the online merchants in the country. More than 300
cooperative banks and the Regional Rural Banks (RRBs) in the country have also issued RuPay ATM
cards.
This website stores data such as
cokies to enable esential site
More than 250 million cards have been issued by various banks, and it is growing at a rate of about
functionality, as wel as marketing,
personalization, and analytics. You
may change your setings at any time
3 million per month. A variant of the card called ‘Kisan Card’ is now being issued by all the Public
or acept the default setings.
Sector Banks in addition to the mainstream debit card which has been issued by 43 banks. RuPay cards
are also issued under the Jan Dhan Yojana scheme.
Privacy Policy
Marketing
NPCI has taken over NFS (National Financial Switch) operations from 14 December 2009 from IDRBT.
PersMoneamlibzeatrisohnip regulations and rules are being framed for enrolling all banks in the country as members so
that when the nationwide payment systems are launched, all would get included on a standardized
Analytics
platform.
Save Acept Al
  
P 41
Page 41
The key products of NPCI are:
National Financial Switch (NFS) which connects 1, 98, 953 ATMs of 449 banks (91 Member Banks, 358
Sub- Member). Immediate Payment Service (IMPS) provided to 84 member banks, with more than 8.49
crore MMID (Mobile Money Identifier) issued, and crossed 10 million transactions.
National Automated Clearing House (NACH) - has close to 400 banks on board. Aadhaar Payments
Bridge System (APBS) has more than 358 banks. Cheque Truncation System (CTS)
has fully migrated in 3 grids - southern, western & northern grids from MICR centres. Aadhaar-enabled
payment system (AEPS) - has 36 member banks. RuPay – Domestic Card Scheme- has issued over 20
crore cards and enabled 10, 70, 000 PoS terminals in the country. The newest and most advanced
addition to the NPCI revolution is the Unified Payments Interface (UPI) which has been launched on 11
April 2016.
RuPay PaySecure - Over 20 banks now offer this authentication mechanism to their RuPay cardholders.
The new transaction flow of Card + OTP has infused more simplicity to cardholders. More than 70,000
merchants accept Rupay cards online. RuPay PaySecure is live on 10 acquiring banks which includes
Union Bank of India, Kotak Mahindra Bank, Citi Bank, ICICI Bank, HDFC Bank, State Bank of India, IDBI
Bank, IndusInd Bank, Bank of Baroda and Bank of India.
42. Debit Cards known as check cards. It operates like cash or a personal check. Debit cards are
different from credit cards. Credit card is a way to “Pay Later” whereas debit card is a way to “Pay Now.”
In case of debit card, bank account of the customer will be debited immediately on completion of
This website stores data such as
transaction. Debit cards are accepted at many locations, including retail stores, petrol pumps, and
cokies to erensatbaleu reasnstes.n Ttiahle s liitbeeralized norms coupled with ease of usage have led to increase debit card base over
functionalityth, aes y weaerls a. sO mf laartkee, tbinagn,ks are consciously driving the customers to alternate delivery channels by issuing
personalizadtieobni,t acnadrd asn oanly ttihces. dYaoyu of opening of the account itself to reduce the work load and to enable them to pay
may changefo ycouusre sde attitnegnst ioatn a onny ctiomree banking activities. In order to make Credit/Debit Card transactions more secure,
or acept thReB dIe mfaaunlt dsaettetidn gtsh.e card holders to enter PIN while transacting at POS terminals. As per recent RBI
guidelines, all banks are mandated to issue only Chip enabled Cards w.e.f.01.10.16.
43.Credit Cards: The concept of credit card was used in 1950 with the launch of charge cards in USA by
Diners Club and American Express. Credit card became more popular with use of magnetic strip in 1970.
Privacy Policy
The first Credit Card was issued in 1981 and Gold Card in 1986 by VISA. Credit cardholder need not
Markceatrinryg cash and purchase goods and services at any approved Merchant Establishments/Point of sale
Terminals by tendering the card duly signing the charge slip. Further, cardholders can make online
Perspounraclhizaastieosn through internet using the card and PIN. Added to this, cardholder can withdraw cash at any
ATM across the globe. However, cash advance attracts charge i.e. transaction fee as well as service
Analytics
fee/interest charge.
Save Acept Al
  
Page 42
44 Charge Card is like any Credit or Debit Card. These cards neither offer revolving credit like the Credit
Card nor debit the account instantaneously like Debit Card. However, the cardholder is required to settle
the bill in full by the due date each month. Charge cards make a good option to develop financial
discipline which likely to enable the cardholders to improve their credit history. Further, charge card offers
a dynamic limit, while rewarding good payment record.
45 Prepaid Card looks like a credit card and works like a debit card. These cards resemble credit and
debit cards in appearance and allow users to load any amount up to ?100000/- and can be used at any
ATM/Point of Sale Terminal. On use of card, funds are directly debited from the card. Cardholders
preload the cards with funds via a cash deposit or wire transfer. There are no finance fees or interest
payments as charges are deducted from the prepaid balance. It is an opportunity for people who have
had little or no access to the mainstream financial system by loading funds onto a prepaid card. It is a
secure and convenient alternative to cash. The issuers of prepaid cards should ensure KYC compliance
while issuing cards to the customers/public. Various types of Prepaid Cards are – Re-loadable Cards
(value is replenished once it is used), Disposable Cards (discarded once the value is used), Closed Cards
can be used for a specific purpose (Phone Cards) and Open Cards (multi-purpose). Re-loadable cards
are most popular among “under-banked” individuals, or those who tend not to possess conventional bank
accounts.
46 Gift Card is one of the paperless payment systems and is highly popular in card industry. It is a card
with predetermined
limit and value is loaded through cash or transfer from the account. Maximum value of each prepaid gift
instrument shall
not exceed Rs.10000/-.However, these instruments shall not be reloadable.
47 Forex Card: It is similar to a normal prepaid card with a special feature meant for the students going
to abroad for higher studies. It can be used at POS terminals, ATMs and for online transactions. Parents
can load/reload the card using the login credentials issued while buying the card. The banks are levying
reasonable charges for cash withdrawal and some banks waiving the charges too. Another advantage of
the card is that it can be used to pay fees instead of paying through wire transfer from India. The
withdrawals or payments are allowed in five currencies viz., USD,GBP, EUR, CAD and AUD. The card
validity ranges up to five years and the maximum permissible limit by RBI under Liberalized Remittance
Scheme is $2.50 lakh. At present, ICICI and HDFC banks are issuing forex cards and other banks may
follow.
47RuPay Debit Cards: It is a domestic card payment network established by National Payment
Corporation of India (NPCI) having more than 100 Banks in India as members with its ATM network
spread across the country. These cards can be used at all ATMs of NPCI network and POS terminals &
e-com transactions (Internet) enabled for RuPay acquiring. The various types of RuPay Debit cards are
as under:
Card Type Meant for
RuPay Kisan Farmers availing Agriculture production loans (Crop Loans)
This website stores data such as
RuPay Aadhaar Beneficiaries of Electronic Benefit Transfer (EBT) scheme
cokies to enable esential site
RuPay Debit Beneficiaries under Financial Inclusion schemes
functionality, as wel as marketing,
It provides accidental insurance cover up to ?1 lakh without any charge to the customer. To avail this
personalization, and analytics. You
benefit, the card must be used minimum once in 90 days. The existing identification modes used in new
may change your setings at any time
delivery channels has a major drawback as it recognize the PIN but not the person. Sometimes, it leads
or acept thtoe idmepfaeurlst osneattiinogns .and may cause financial loss. To overcome the problem, biometric technologies such as
Fingerprint Recognition, Face Recognition, Voice Authentication, Hand Geometry, Retinal Scanning, Iris
Scanning and Signature Verification have come in to force. Whenever the user access to delivery channel,
Privacy Poliitc vyerifies with the server and deliver the service if found correct. Recently, NPCI introduced two variants
of cards viz., Rupay Platinum and Rupay Select with value added features at competitive interchange fee
Markceotminpgared to VISA/Master.
Personalization
Analytics
Save Acept Al
  
Page 43
48.NPCI service portfolio now and in the near future include:
National Financial Switch (NFS) - network of shared automated teller machines in India. Unified
Payment Interface (UPI) - Single mobile application for accessing different bank
accounts
BHIM App - Smartphone app built using UPI interface.
Immediate Payment Service (IMPS) - Real time payment with mobile number. *99# -
mobile banking using USSD
National Automated Clearing House (NACH)-
Cheque Truncation System -online image-based cheque clearing system
Aadhaar Payments Bridge System (APBS) -
Bharat Bill Payment System (BBPS) - integrated bill payment system
49 IMPS (Immediate Payment Services)
Immediate Payment Service (IMPS) is an instant real-time inter-bank electronic funds transfer system
in India. IMPS offers an inter-bank electronic fund transfer service through mobile phones. Unlike
NEFT and RTGS, the service is available 24/7 throughout the year including bank holidays. When one
initiates a fund transfer via IMPS, the initiator bank sends a message to IMPS, which debits the money
and sends it to the receiving account. All this happens within 5-10 seconds.
This website stores data such as
IMPS is an innovative real time payment service that is available round the clock. This service is offered
cokies to enable esential site
by National Payments Corporation of India (NPCI) that empowers customers to transfer money instantly
functionality, as wel as marketing,
through banks and RBI authorized Prepaid Payment Instrument Issuers (PPI) across India.
personalization, and analytics. You
may change your setings at any time
or acept the default setings.
Benefits of IMPS
Privacy Policy
Marketing Instant
Personalization
Available 24 x7 (functional even on holidays) Safe and
Analytics
secure, easily accessible and cost effective
Save Acept Al
  
Page 44
Channel Independent can be initiated from Mobile/ Internet / ATM channels
Debit & Credit Confirmation by SMS to both sender and receiver
49. National Unified USSD Platform (NUUP):
NUUP (National Unified USSD Platform) is a USSD based mobile banking service from NPCI that
brings together all the Banks and Telecom Service Providers. In NUUP, a customer can access
banking services by just pressing *99# from his/her mobile phones. This service works across all
GSM mobile handsets.
IMPS transactions can be sent and received 24X7, (round the clock), including on holidays. Both sender
& receiver get SMS confirmation.
For using IMPS on mobile phones, a customer will have to register for mobile banking with his/her
individual bank. However, for initiating IMPS using Bank branch, Internet banking and ATM channels, no
prior Mobile banking registration is required. Both banked as well as un-banked customer can avail IMPS.
However, unbanked customer can initiate IMPS transaction using the services of Pre-Paid Payments
instrument issuer (PPI). MMID - Mobile Money Identifier is a 7 digit number, issued by banks. MMID is
one of the input which when clubbed with mobile number facilitates fund transfer. Combination of Mobile
no. & MMID is uniquely linked with an Account number and helps in identifying the beneficiary details.
Different MMID’s can be linked to same Mobile Number. (Please contact your bank for getting the MMID
issued)
Options available for a customer for doing IMPS transaction
This website stores data such as
cokies to enable esential site
• Using Beneficiary Mobile no. and MMID
functionality, as • w elUl assin mg aBrkeenteinfigc,iary Account no. and IFS Code
personalization, and analytics. You
may change yo•ur seUtsininggs Baet naenfyic tiiamrye Aadhaar Number
or acept the default setings.
Privacy Policy
Bharat Interface for Money (BHIM)
Marketing
Personalization
Bharat Interface for Money (BHIM) is an app that lets you make simple, easy and quick payment
Analytics
transactions using Unified Payments Interface (UPI). You can make instant bank-to-bank payments and
SavePay and colAlecct empotn Aelyl using just Mobile number or Virtual Payment Address (VPA).
  
Page 45
The following are the features of BHIM:
1. Send Money: User can send money using a Virtual Payment Address (VPA), Account Number &
IFSC, Aadhaar Number or QR code.
2. Request Money: User can collect money by entering Virtual Payment Address (VPA). Additionally
through BHIM App, one can also transfer money using Mobile No. (Mobile No should be
registered with BHIM or *99# and account should be linked)
3. Scan & Pay: User can pay by scanning the QR code through Scan & Pay & generate your QR
option is also present.
4. Transactions: User can check transaction history and also pending UPI collect requests (if any)
and approve or reject. User can also raise complaint for the declined transactions by clicking on
Report issue in transactions.
5. Profile: User can view the static QR code and Payment addresses created or also share the QR
code through various messenger applications like WhatsApp, Email etc. available on phone and
download the QR code.
6. Bank Account: User can see the bank account linked with his/her BHIM App and set/change the
UPI PIN. User can also change the bank account linked with BHIM App by clicking Change
account provided in Menu and can also check Balance of his/her linked Bank Account by clicking
“REQUEST BALANCE”
7. Language: Up to 8 regional languages (Tamil, Telugu, Bengali, Malayalam, Oriya, Gujarati,
Kannada ,Hindi) available on BHIM to improve user experience.
8. Block User: Block/Spam users who are sending you collect requests from illicit sources.
9. Privacy: Allow a user to disable and enable mobilenumber@upi in the profile if a secondary VPA
is created (QR for the disabled VPA is also disabled).
This website stores data such as
cokies to enable esential site
functionality*,* BasH wIMe lAl aPsP m isa rakveatiinlagb,le in play store (for android User) and App Store (for Apple User)**
personalization, and analytics. You
50. Bharat QR
may change your setings at any time
or acept the default setings.
In a major push for seamless cashless transactions, Govt. of India has launched Bharat QR Code, which
Privacy Policy
is world’s first interoperable payment platform. National Payments Corporation of India (NPCI), which is
the umbrella organisation for all digital and online retail payment systems in India, has developed this
Marketing
platform, which is expected to inspire and encourage more digital payments, without using debit or credit
Personalization
card.
Analytics
Save Acept Al
  
Page 46
QR Codes are black and white two-dimensional machine readable code, which stores information about
the merchant’s bank accounts and URLs. With Bharat QR Code interface, merchants need to take a
printout of their QR code (or have a soft copy) and show it to the consumer, who can simply scan the
code using his or her smartphone, and the payment would be made. Instantly, seamlessly and without
any hassles.
We had reported last year that Govt. is considering to create a common QR Code based payment
mechanism, which has now been officially launched. The Retail industry is excited by its possibilities
because QR code-based payments solves two major problems in a single go: a) less time consumed to
make the payment, compared to debit/credit card b) no requirement to actually flash your credit/debit
cards for making the payment.
Here are some interesting facts about Bharat QR Code payment system, which every debit/credit holder
(who is also a bank account holder) should be aware of:
51.Smart Cards
The smartcards have increased data security, an active anti-fraud capabilities, multipurpose capabilities,
flexibility in applications, and off-line validation. These functions are more or less inter-related but the
most important of all is the high level of security provided by the smartcard compared to the other type of
cards in operation. This makes it possible the use the smart cards in transactions dealing with money,
property and personal data.
The Reserve Bank of India has set a target for banks to upgrade all ATMs by September 2017 with
additional safety measures to process EMV chip and PIN cards in order to prevent skimming and cloning
of debit and credit cards.
While the POS terminal infrastructure in the country has been enabled to accept and process EMV chip
and PIN cards, the ATM infrastructure continues to process the card transactions based on data from the
This website stores data such as
cokies to emnaagbnlee etics ssetnrtipiael .s iAtes a result, the ATM card transactions remain vulnerable to skimming, cloning, etc.
frauds, even though the cards are EMV chip and PIN based.
functionality, as wel as marketing,
personalization, and analytics. You
It has become necessary to mandate EMV (Europay, MasterCard, Visa) chip and PIN card acceptance
may change your setings at any time
and processing at ATMs also. Contact chip processing of EMV chip and PIN cards at ATMs would not
or acept the default setings.
only enhance the safety and security of transactions at ATMs but also facilitate preparedness of the
banks for the proposed “EMV Liability Shift” for ATM transactions, as and when it comes into effect.
Privacy Policy
Further, in order to ensure uniformity in card payments ecosystem, banks should also implement the new
Markreeqtinugirements at their micro-ATMs which are enabled to handle card-based payments.
Personalization
Analytics
Save Acept Al
  
Page 47
53.CVV OR CSC NUMBER
The CVV Number ("Card Verification Value") on credit card or debit card is a 3 digit number on VISA,
MasterCard and Discover branded credit and debit cards. On American Express branded credit or debit
card it is a 4 digit numeric code.
The CVV number can be located by looking on credit or debit card, as illustrated in the image below:
Providing the CVV number to an online merchant proves that one actually has the physical credit or debit
card - and helps to keep one safe while reducing fraud.
CVV numbers are NOT the card's secret PIN (Personal Identification Number).
One should never enter one’s PIN number when asked to provide the CVV. (PIN numbers allow one to
use one’s credit or debit card at an ATM or when making an in-person purchase with debit card or a cash
advance with any credit card.)
CVV numbers are also known as CSC numbers ("Card Security Code"), as well as CVV2 numbers, which
are the same as CVV numbers, except that they have been generated by a 2nd generation process that
makes them harder to "guess".
In 2016, a new e-commerce technology called Motioncode was introduced, designed to automatically
refresh the CVV code to a new one every hour or so.
54.ATM & POINT OF SALE (POS)
ATM (Automated Teller Machine) A typical ATM could duplicate most of the services of a live teller;
deposits, withdrawals, and money transfers between accounts all could be made with relative ease. More
significantly, the terminals could be located outside the bank lobby, allowing 24 hour access and greater
customer convenience. For the banks ATM’s became mini-branches that extended their financial territory
and customer base far beyond physical buildings. As a result, many ATMs rapidly found homes inside
major retail outlets, convenience stores, gas stations, and other highly trafficked locations, a situation
This websitwe esltcooremse dda btay sbuucshin aessses because it provided instant cash for customers.
cokies to enable esential site
functionalityW, ahsit ew lealb aesl AmTaMrkse tainreg ,those ATMs which do not belong to any bank but managed by a non-banking entity,
personalizaeti.ogn.,, Iannddic aansahl,y Itnicdsi.a Y-1o uATM, Prism Payment Services.
may change your setings at any time
or acept thHeo dweefavuelrt, sAeTtMing’ss w. ould not be the final solution to the common electronic goal, because they still involved
the use of paper money. Yet, in a second generation machine called a Point of Sale terminal (POS), the
prospect of having a truly cashless society suddenly took a giant leap forward. The potential of POS for
Privacy Policy
achieving a totally automated economy was enormous. It was logical to assume that if the capability
existed for electronic banking to the extent of obtaining cash out of an account using a networked ATM
Marketing
system, then the technology also must be ripe for eliminating the need for physical money altogether.
PersPoOnaSli zteartmioinnals were seen as a key ingredient in the transition to this goal.
Analytics
Save Acept Al
  
Page 48
A point of sale terminal (POS terminal) is an electronic device used to process card payments at retail
locations. . Point of sale terminals are a combination of software and hardware that allows retail locations
to accept card payments without updating their cash registers to read cards directly. The costs of
installing POS terminals vary with the size of the business and the terms from the supplier. Small
merchants may have to pay rent for the terminal, as well as pay an additional per-transaction fee.
The trend is away from the traditional use of just magnetic stripe reader as more options open up for
mobile payments.
A POS terminal generally does the following:
Reads the information off a customer’s credit or debit card
Checks whether the funds in a customer’s bank account are sufficient
Transfers the funds from the customer’s account to the seller’s account (or at least,
accounts for the transfer with the credit card network)
Records the transaction and prints a receipt
Despite the more advanced technology of a POS system as compared to a simple cash register, the POS
system is still as vulnerable to employee theft through the sale window. A dishonest cashier at a retail
outlet can collude with a friend who pretends to be just another customer. During checkout the cashier
can bypass scanning certain items or enter a lower quantity for some items thus profiting thereby from the
"free" goods.
With the launch of mobile payment particularly Android Pay and Apple Pay both in 2015, it is expected
that because of its greater convenience coupled with good security features, this would eventually eclipse
other types of payment services - including the use of payment terminals. However, for mobile payment to
This website stores data such as
cokies to egnoa fbullely e msaeinnstitarle saitme, mobile devices like smartphones that are NFC-enabled must first become universal.
functionalityN, FasC w(enlel aars mfiealrdk ectionmg,munication) is the technology that allows two devices—like your phone and a
personalizaptiaoynm, aenndts a tnearmlytiincas.l— Yotou talk to each other when they're close together. NFC is the technology that enables
may changeco ynotuarc tsleestsin pgas yamt aennyts t.ime
or acept the default setings.
Electronic funds transfer at point of sale (EFTPOS) is an electronic payment system involving electronic
funds transfers based on the use of payment cards, such as debit or credit cards, at payment terminals
Privacy Polliocycated at points of sale. EFTPOS is highly popular in Australia and New Zealand, and being used in NZ
for about 60% of all retail transactions.
Marketing
Personalization
Analytics
Save Acept Al
  
p y g p
Page 49
Latest Trends in eCommerce
A key outcome of the technology revolution in India has been connectivity, which has fuelled
unprecedented access to information. Millions of people who had little means to join the national
discourse can now gain new insights into the world around them. Farmers know crop prices. Consumers
understand global standards of product and service quality. Rural Indians recognise the differences
between the opportunities available to them and those available to their urban counterparts. And citizens
have a mass forum for expressing their political opinions. The upshot of this connectivity revolution has
been empowerment of Indians.
An analysis of the demographic profile of internet users further testifies that eCommerce will rise rapidly in
India in coming years. Around 75% of Indian internet users are in the age group of 15 to 34 years. This
category shops more than the remaining population. Peer pressure, rising aspirations with career growth,
fashion and trends encourage this segment to shop more than any other category and India, therefore,
clearly enjoys a demographic dividend that favours the growth of eCommerce. In coming years, as
internet presence increases in rural areas, rural India will yield more eCommerce business
Mobile to be the most influential aspect of eCommerce -With mobile apps being developed by most
eCommerce websites, smartphones are increasingly replacing PCs for online shopping. In 2013, only
10% of the mobile users used smartphones, and only 5% of the eCommerce transactions were made
through a mobile device. This figure has more than doubled, and more than 13% of all eCommerce
transactions today happen via mobile3. According to some industry players, over 50% of the orders are
being placed through mobile apps, which is not only leading to substantial customer acquisition but also
building customer loyalty for various brands. However, most mobile transactions so far are for
entertainment, such as booking movie tickets and music downloads. This trend will change soon with
more and more merchandise being ordered online.
More business coming from smaller towns - eCommerce is increasingly attracting customers from Tier 2
and 3 cities, where people have limited access to brands but have high aspirations. According to
This websiteeC sotomremse draceta c soumchp aansies, these cities have seen a 30% to 50% rise in transactions.
cokies to enable esential site
functionality, as wel as marketing,
personalization, and analytics. You
Enhanced shopping experience - Besides general online shopping, customers are also shopping online
may change your setings at any time
for weddings and festivals, thanks to wider range of products being offered and aggressive
or acept the default setings.
advertisements. The free and quick shipment and wider choice of products, along with the ease of
Privacy Policy
shopping online as compared to in-store shopping, is also helping eCommerce gather momentum.
Marketing
PersFounrathlizear,t ieoCnommerce companies are doing rapid business due to sales.
AnalEyxticcslusive partnerships with leading brands - Over the year or so, there has been a trend of exclusive tie-
ups between eTailers and established boutiques, designers, and high-end lifestyle and fashion brands.
SaveFor instanceA,c cJeapbot nAgl added international fashion brands such as Dorothy Perkins, River Island, Blue
  
p y @g p
Page 50
saint and Miss Selfridge, along with local fashion brands through Jabong Boutiques. Similarly, Myntra
benefited from exclusive tie-ups with brands such as Harvard Lifestyle, Desigual and WROGN from Virat
Kohli.
Expanding the product basket - There is a recent trend of relatively newer products such as grocery,
hygiene, and healthcare products being purchased online. Similarly, lingerie and Indian jewellery has also
been in great demand among customers outside India. Export comprises 95% of cross-border
eCommerce, with the US, UK, Australia, Canada and Germany being the major markets.
Innovation in online business models
To get the maximum benefit from eCommerce business, a large number of companies such as Amazon,
Alibaba etc. are adopting different innovative ideas and operating models including partnering with online
marketplaces or setting up their own online stores. Some key operating models include the following:
• Marketplace and pick-up & drop is a model where sellers often partner with leading marketplaces
to set up a dedicated online store on the latter’s website. Here sellers play a key role of managing
inventory and driving sales. They leverage on high traffic on the marketplaces’ website and
access their distribution network. However, the sellers have limited say on pricing and customer
experience.
• Self-owned inventory is a model where the eCommerce player owns the inventory. The model
provides better post-purchase customer experience and fulfilment. It provides smoother
operations due to ready information on the inventory, location, supply chain and shipments,
effectively leading to better control over inventory. On the flipside, however, there are risks of
potential mark downs and working capital getting tied up in inventory.
• Private label reflects a business where an eCommerce company sets up its own brand goods,
which it sells through its own website. This model offers a wide-ranging products and pricing to its
customers and competes with branded labels. Here, margins are typically higher than third-party
branded goods.
This website stores data such as
cokies to enable esential site
functionality, as• w elWl ahsi tme alarkbeetiln ign,volves the setting up of a branded online store managed by the eCommerce player
personalization, ando ra naa ltyhtiircds . pYaoruty. The brand takes the responsibility of generating website traffic and providing
services by partnering with payment gateways. It helps build trust, customer affinity and loyalty
may change your setings at any time
and provides better control of brand and product experience.
or acept the default setings.
54.SMS BANKING & BANKING ALERTS
Privacy Policy
Marketing
SMS banking is a form of mobile banking. It is a facility used by some banks or other financial institutions
Perstoon saelinzda tmioenssages (also called notifications or alerts) to customers' mobile phones using SMS messaging,
or a service provided by them which enables customers to perform some financial transactions using
Analytics
SMS.
Save Acept Al
  
p y @g p
Page 51
SMS banking services may use either push and pull messages. Push messages are those that a bank
sends out to a customer's mobile phone, without the customer initiating a request for the information.
Typically, a push message could be a mobile marketing message or an alert of an event which happens
in the customer's bank account, such as a large withdrawal of funds from an ATM or a large payment
involving the customer's credit card, etc. It may also be an alert that some payment is due, or that an e-
statement is ready to be downloaded.
Another type of push message is one-time password (OTPs). OTPs are the latest tool used by financial
institutions to combat cyber fraud. Instead of relying on traditional memorized passwords, OTPs are sent
to a customer's mobile phone via SMS, who are required to repeat the OTP to complete transactions
using online or mobile banking. The OTP is valid for a relatively short period and expires once it has been
used.
Bank customers can select the type of activities for which they wish to receive an alert. The selection can
be done either using internet banking or by phone.
Pull messages are initiated by the customer, using a mobile phone, for obtaining information or
performing a transaction in the bank account. Examples of pull messages include an account balance
enquiry, or requests for current information like currency exchange rates and deposit interest rates, as
published and updated by the bank. Depending on the selected extent of SMS banking transactions
offered by the bank, a customer can be authorized to carry out either non-financial transactions, or both
and financial and non-financial transactions. SMS banking solutions offer customers a range of
functionality, classified by push and pull services as outlined below.
Typical push services would include:
periodic account balance reporting (say at the end of month);
This website stores rdeaptoar tsinugch o fa ssalary and other credits to the bank account;
cokies to enable esential site
functionality, as wel as marketing,
personalization, ands uacncaelystsicfus.l oYro uun-successful execution of a standing order;
may change your sestuticncgess astf ualn pya tyimmeent of a cheque issued on the account;
or acept the default setings.
insufficient funds;
Privacy Policy
large value withdrawals on an account;
Marketing
large value withdrawals on the ATM or EFTPOS on a debit card;
Personalization
Analytics
large value payment on a credit card or out of country activity on a credit card. one-
Save timeA pcacsespwt oArldl and authentication
  
  
Page 52
an alert that some payment is due
an alert that an e-statement is ready to be downloaded.
Typical pull services would include:
Account balance enquiry; Mini statement request; Electronic bill payment;
Transfers between customer's own accounts, like moving money from a savings account to a
current account to fund a cheque;
Stop payment instruction on a cheque;
Requesting for an ATM card or credit card to be suspended;
De-activating a credit or debit card when it is lost or the PIN is known to be
compromised;
Foreign currency exchange rates enquiry;
Fixed deposit interest rates enquiry
Security concerns in SMS Banking
The lack of encryption on SMS messages is an area of concern that is often discussed. This concern
sometimes arises within the group of the bank’s technology personnel, due to their familiarity and past
experience with encryption on the ATM and other payment channels. The lack of encryption is inherent to
the SMS banking channel and several banks that use it have overcome their fears by introducing
compensating controls and limiting the scope of the SMS banking application to where it offers an
advantage over other channels.
This website stores data such as
cokies to enable esential site
functionality, as wel as marketing,
personalizaStiuonp,p aliendrs a onfa SlyMticSs .b Yaonuking software solutions have found reliable means by which the security concerns
may changec ayno ubre s eatdtindgress aste adn. yT tyimpiecally the methods employed are by pre-registration and using security tokens
or acept thweh deerefa tuhlte s teratninsgasc.tion risk is perceived to be high.
Privacy Policy
Most online banking platforms are owned and developed by the banks using them. There is only one
open source online banking platform supporting mobile banking and SMS payments called Cyclos, which
Marketing
is developed to stimulate and empower local banks in development countries.
Personalization
Analytics
Save Acept Al
  
  
Page 53
SMS & Email Alerts in Banking
This is a very useful facility that sends customer information on customer’s banking transactions. The
alerts are either event based or frequency based. When register for certain alerts they are sent to
customer either via SMS or email, or both. Some alerts are made mandatory by regulator whereas for
others they customer may choose as per his requirement. Some banks send email alerts for monthly
account statements in encrypted pdf format which may be opened using a password only.
RBI’s has made SMS for clearing cheque transactions mandatory- Expressing concern over the rise in
cheque-related fraud cases, the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has made SMS alerts mandatory for such
transactions since November 2014. Banks now send SMS alerts to both payer and drawer in cheque
transactions as soon as the instruments are received for clearing.
56.Bharat Bill Payment System (BBPS)
Bharat Bill Payment System (BBPS) is an integrated bill payment system in India offering interoperable
and accessible bill payment service to customers online as well as through a network of agents, enabling
multiple payment modes, and providing instant confirmation of payment.
57. National Payments Corporation of India (NPCI) will function as the authorised Bharat Bill Payment
Central Unit (BBPCU), which will be responsible for setting business standards, rules and procedures for
technical and business requirements for all the participants. NPCI, as the BBPCU, will also undertake
clearing and settlement activities related to transactions routed through BBPS. Existing bill aggregators
and banks are envisaged to work as Operating Units to provide an interoperable bill payment system
irrespective of which unit has on-boarded a particular biller. Payments may be made through the BBPS
using cash, transfer cheques, and electronic modes. To start with, the scope of BBPS will cover repetitive
payments for everyday utility services such as electricity, water, gas, telephone and Direct-to-Home
(DTH). Gradually, the scope would be expanded to include other types of repetitive payments, like school
This websit/e u sntoivreerss idtya tfae essu,c mh uasnicipal taxes etc.
cokies to enable esential site
Computer Security which is also at times referred to as information security is concerned with three main
functionality, as wel as marketing,
areas:
personalization, and analytics. You
may change your setings at any time
1. Confidentiality:- Only authorized users can access the data resources and information.
or acept the default setings.
2. Integrity:- Only authorized users should be able to modify the data when needed.
Privacy Policy
3. Availability:- Data should be available to users when needed.
Marketing
PersEoancahliz oaft itohne above three areas is critical for computer security. Confidentiality deals with prevention of
data theft such as bank account information, credit card information, passwords etc. Integrity refers to
Analytics
prevention of unauthorized data creation, modification or deletion. Last but not the least is availability,
which ensures that the users are able to access data whenever needed.
Save Acept Al
 
  
Page 54
58.Aadhaar Enabled Payment System
Background
In order to further speed track Financial Inclusion in the country, Two Working Group were constituted by
RBI on MicroATM standards and Central Infrastructure & Connectivity for Aadhaar based financial
inclusion transactions with members representing RBI, Unique Identification Authority of India, NPCI,
Institute for Development and Research in Banking Technology and some special invitees representing
banks and research institutions.
The working group on MicroATM standards & Central Infrastructure & Connectivity has submitted its
report to RBI. As a part of the working group it was proposed to conduct a Lab level Proof of concept
(PoC), integrating the authentication & encryption standards of UIDAI, to test the efficacy of MicroATM
standards and transactions using Aadhaar before they are put to actual use. The PoC was successfully
demonstrated at various venues.
AEPS is a new payment service offered by the National Payments Corporation of India to banks, financial
institutions using ‘Aadhaar’. This shall be known as ‘Aadhaar Enabled Payment System’ and may also be
referred to as “AEPS”. AEPS is a bank led model which allows online interoperable financial inclusion
transaction at PoS (MicroATM) through the Business correspondent of any bank using the Aadhaar
authentication. Any resident of India holding an Aadhaar number and having a bank account may be a
part of the Aadhaar Enabled Payment System.
The customer conducting an AEPS transaction may visit a BC Customer Access Point. The BC using
the Point of Sale (MicroATM) device will be able to process transactions like Cash Withdrawal, Cash
Deposit, Balance Enquiry and Fund Transfer by selecting the transaction of their choice. The Customer
needs to provide their Aadhaar Number and their bank name or bank IIN number.
IIN number identifies the bank to which the customer has mapped his/her Aadhaar number. Each bank
This website stores data such as
cokies to ewnoaubldle ebses eisnstiuael dsi tea unique Issuer Identification Number (IIN) NPCI. This is a six digit number. The
functionalityc,u asst owmeel ra sse mrvaicrkee ptionign,t will have the IIN number represented on the terminal by various bank logos/ bank
personalizantiaomn,e asn odr a tnhael yBtiucssi.n Yeosus Correspondent (BC) agent will have a chart displayed of various banks IIN in the
may changecu ysotuorm seert tsinegrsv iacte a cneyn ttimree. Therefore the customer need not necessarily remember the IIN. It is however
or acept three cdoemfamulet nsdeetdin tghsa.t the customer be aware of their bank IIN to completely ensure an AEPS transaction.
Privacy Policy
The four Aadhaar enabled basic types of banking transactions are as follows:-
Marketing
• Balance Enquiry
Personalization
• Cash Withdrawal
Analytics
• Cash Deposit
Save Acept Al
• Aadhaar to Aadhaar Funds Transfer
 
  
Page 55
The only inputs required for a customer to do a transaction under this scenario are:-
• IIN (Identifying the Bank to which the customer is associated)
• Aadhaar Number
• Fingerprint captured during their enrollment
Objectives
 To empower a bank customer to use Aadhaar as his/her identity to access his/ her respective
Aadhaar enabled bank account and perform basic banking transactions like balance enquiry,
Cash deposit, cash withdrawal, remittances that are intrabank or interbank in nature, through a
Business Correspondent.
 To sub-serve the goal of Government of India (GoI) and Reserve Bank of India (RBI) in furthering
Financial Inclusion.
 To sub-serve the goal of RBI in electronification of retail payments.
 To enable banks to route the Aadhaar initiated interbank transactions through a central switching
and clearing agency.
 To facilitate disbursements of Government entitlements like NREGA, Social Security pension,
Handicapped Old Age Pension etc. of any Central or State Government bodies, using Aadhaar
and authentication thereof as supported by UIDAI.
 To facilitate inter-operability across banks in a safe and secured manner.
 To build the foundation for a full range of Aadhaar enabled Banking services.
Services Offered by AEPS
 Balance Enquiry
 Cash Withdrawal
 Cash Deposit
This website store s Adaadtah asuarc hto a Asadhaar Fund Transfer
cokies to enable esential site
 Gateway Authentication Services
functionality, as wel as marketing,
personalization, and analytics. You
may change your setings at any time
or acept the default setings.
Privacy Policy
Marketing
Personalization
Analytics
Save Acept Al
 
  
Page 56
Digital Banking Recollected questions:::
1.CTS abbreviation cheque truncation system
2. What is firewall?: A software programme for protecting against unauthorized access to the information.
3.BBPS … Bhatart Bill payment sytem
4.MDR: merchant discount rate
5. minimum amount which can be remitted under RTGS by a customer: Minimum Rs. 2 lac and no
Maximum.
6.Max amount of NEFT can be remitted ..no limit
7. AEPS stands for : Aadhar Enabled Payment System.
8. CPPC stands for : Central Pension Processing Cell.
9. IBPP stands for : Internet Bill Presentation & Payment.
10. Rupay Platform refers to: National Payments Corporation of India (NPCI) initiated the launch of
RuPay card in India. It was
done with the intention of integration of payment systems in the country. It has led to lower transaction
cost as
processing is being done within country. Also, transactions will be faster.
11. Encryption means: Conversion of plain language into secret language, i.e., coding and The extent of
coverage under
12. Maximum RTGS Charge for Rs.2 lac to 5 lac: Rs.25.00 + service tax
13. Application under ASBA can be applied for: a) IPO b) Right Issue c) Mutual fund
14. E-sahyog portal:belongs to Income Tax
15. A Proxy server is for: To provide security against unauthorized users
16. Phising?: To steal the customers personal / confidential data
17. In case of failed ATM transaction customer will get money in 7 working days after compliant
This website stores data such as
18. CVV: Customer Verification Value
cokies to enable esential site
19.NPCI: National Payment Corporation of India.
functionality, as wel as marketing,
20. NUUP: National Unified USSD Platform.
personalization, and analytics. You
21.IMEI: International Mobile Equipment Identity.
may change your setings at any time
22. CVD: Customer Verification Data.
or acept th2e3 .dSeTfaPu lst tsraeitgtihntg tsh.rough process
24. . Forward Market Commission is established for:.- Commodity futures
25. Full form of ALU: Arithmetical Logical Unit
Privacy Pol2ic6y. Full form of HTTP: Hyper Text Transfer Protocol
27. Full form of INFINET? Indian Financial Network
Mark2e8t.i nGgBM: Govt. Business Module
29. IBPP stands for: Internet Bill Presentation & Payment
Personalization
30. IMPS: Immediate Mobile Payment Service - Mobile to account
31. Starting of a computer is called: Booting
Analytics
32. Universal set of standards and guidelines for communication by EDI is called: EDIFACT.
33. Full form of ISDN: Integrated Services Digital Network.
Save Acept Al
34. RTGS amount limit for customers: Min Rs.2 lac and no max
35. Which bank has max share in INFINO PAYTECH Ltd : ICICI Bank
 
  
Page 57
36. USSD: Unstructured Supplementary Service Data.
37. LAN: Local Area Network
38. AEPS stands for : Aadhar Enabled Payment System
39 ATM : Anywhere, anytime,
40. BCP- Business continuity Plan
41. First committee on computerization in banks was headed by: Dr C Rangarajan.
42. In an Organisation communication between the same organization, what type of system applicable:
Intranet.
43. In CBS, signatures are loaded through scanning..
44. WAN: Wide area network
45.WAN uses ….interconnecting computers at different Geographical locations
46.CHI : Clearing Housing interface
47.ECE: electronic clearing system
48.APB: Aadhaar pay bridge
49. When in a computer network one network protocol encapsulates a different payload protocol, it is
called: Tunnel.
50 Computer Security Day : 30th November
51. customer’s account should be credited within how many days of the complaint?: 7 working
52. First step towards computerisation in Banking: Setting up ALPM (Advance Ledger Posting Machine)
53. CIDR: central identities data repository
54.BBPCU:Bharat bill payment central unit
Today Digital banking recollected
Aeps
Nach
Upi
Virtual keyboard to safegaurd against keylogger
4 questions on process of chargeback
Nfc technology and RFID
Approx 8-10 question on security of POS terminals
2 que on MDR
This websitWe shtoaret si sd actaas shu cwh iatshdrawal through pos called
cokies to enable esential site
functionality, as wel as marketing,
personalization, and analytics. You
may change your setings at any time
or acept the default setings.
Many questions were there from BC
Privacy Policy
, POS,
Markoeftfin ugs,
Persoonna luizsa ttiorannsactions,
pharming attack,
Analytics
phishing attack,
Save Acept Al
ATM skimming,
business risk,
 
