RECOMMENDED READING
The Institute has prepared comprehensive courseware in the form of study kits to facilitate
preparation for the examination without intervention of the teacher. An attempt has heen
made to cover fully the syllabus prescribed for each module/subject and the presentation of
topics may not always be in the same sequence as given in the syllabus.
Candidates are also expected to take note of all the latest developments relating to the subject
covered in the syllabus by referring to Financial Papers, Economic Journals, Latest Books
and Publications
PAPER 1 - PRINCIPLES & PRACTICE OF
BANKING.
The candidates would be able to acquire an in-depth knowledge of the following:
• Various functions associated with banking.
• Practice and procedures relating to deposit and credit, documentation, monitoring and
control.
• An insight into marketing of banking services and banking technology.
MODULE A - INDIAN FINANCIAL SYSTEM
Recent Developments in the Indian Financial System; Market Structure and Financial
Innovation. RBI, SEBI, IRDA, etc. - their Major Functions. Role and Functions of Banks -
Regulatory Provisions/ Enactments Governing Banks.
Retail Banking: Approach, Products, Marketing, etc.
Wholesale Banking; International Banking
Role and Functions of Capital Markets
Role and Functions of Mutual Funds
Role and Functions of Insurance Companies - Bancassurance
Importance of Risk Management in Banks - Types of Risk - Impact and Management
Factoring & Forfaiting
Alliances/Mergers/Consolidation
ADR/GDR/Off Balance Sheet Items
Participatory Notes
Credit Information Bureau (India) Ltd.
Fair Practices for Debt Collection
Basel II
Banking Codes and Standards Board
MODULE B - FUNCTIONS OF BANKS Deposits
Banker-Customer Relations - Know Your Customer [KYC] Guidelines - Different Deposit
Products -Services Rendered by Banks - Mandate and Power of Attorney
Banker's Lien - Right of Set-off- Garnishee Order - Income Tax Attachment Order, etc.
Payment and Collection of Cheque - Duties and Responsibilities of Paying and Collecting
Banker-Protection Available to Paying and Collecting Banker under NI Act - Endorsements -
Forged Instruments - Bouncing of Cheques and their Implications
Opening of Accounts for Various Types of Customers - Minors - Joint Account Holders -
HUF -Firms - Companies - Trusts - Societies - Govt. and Public Bodies
Importance of AML Credit
Principles of Lending - Various Credit Products/Facilities - Working Capital and Term Loans
- Credit Appraisal Techniques - Approach to Lending-Credit Management - Credit
Monitoring - NPA Management - Different Types of Documents; Documentation Procedures;
Stamping of Documents
Securities - Different Modes of Charging - Types of Collaterals and their Characteristics
Priority Sector Lending - Sectors - Targets - Issues/Problems - Recent Developments -
Financial Inclusion Agriculture/SMEs/SHGs/SSI/Tiny Sector Financing
New Products & Services - Factoring, Securitisation, Bancassurance, Mutual Funds, etc.
Credit Cards/Home Loans/Personal Loans/Consumer Loans - Brief Outline of Procedures and
Practices
Ancillary Services: Remittances, Safe Deposit Lockers, etc.
MODULE C - BANKING TECHNOLOGY
Electronic Banking - Core Banking - Electronic Products
Banking Technology - Distribution Channels - Teller Machines at the Bank Counters - Cash
Dispensers
- ATMs - Anywhere Anytime Banking - Home Banking (Corporate and Personal) -
Electronic Payment
Systems
Online Banking - Online Enquiry and Update Facilities - Personal Identification Numbers
and their Use in Conjunction with Magnetic Cards of Both Credit and Debit Cards, Smart
Cards, Signature Storage and Display by Electronic Means, Cheque Truncation, Microfiche,
Note and Coin Counting Devices
Electronic Funds Transfer Systems - Plain Messages (Telex or Data Communication) -
Structured Messages (SWIFT, etc.) - RTGS
Information Technology - Current Trends - Banknet, RBI Net, Datanet, Nicnet, I-net,
Internet, E-mail, etc. - Role and Uses of Technology Upgradation - Global Developments in
Banking Technology -Information Technology in Finance and Service Delivery - Impact of
Technology on Banks - Protecting the Confidentiality and Secrecy of Data - Effect on
Customers and Service Quality - Computer Audit
- Information System Audit - Information System Security and Disaster Management
MODULE D - SUPPORT SERVICES - MARKETING OF BANKING SERVICES AND
PRODUCTS
Marketing Management - Meaning, Importance and Functions - Marketing of Services -
Product Research & Development - Test Marketing of Bank Products - Product Life Cycle -
Product Modification - New Product Development - Packaging and Branding of Bank
Products - Diversification
- Pricing of Bank Products and Services - Objectives! Strategies and Methods - Factors
Influencing
the Pricing Decisions, Importance of Pricing. Distribution - Factors Influencing - Direct and
Indirect
Channels of Bank Products - Physical Distribution - Channel Functions and Services -
Promotion -
Promotion Mix and Role of Promotion in Marketing - Marketing Information Systems - Role
of DSA/
DMA in Bank Marketing - Channel Management - Selling Function in a Bank - Portfolio and
Wealth
Management - Tele Marketing/Mobile Phone Banking
CONTENTS
Foreword v
MODULE A: INDIAN FINANCIAL SYSTEM
1. Indian Financial System - An Overview / 3
2. Banking Regulation 11
3. Retail Banking, Wholesale and International Banking, ADR, GDR
and Participatory Notes 21
4. Role and Functions of Capital Market, Securities and Exchange Board of India
(SEBI)33
5. Role and Functions of Mutual Funds 45
6. Role and Functions of Insurance Companies, Bancassurance and Insurance
Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA) 51
7. Factoring, Forfaiting Services and Off-Balance Items 59
8. Risk Management and BASEL II - An Overview 69
9. Alliances/Mergers/Consolidation 81
10. Credit Information Bureau (India) Limited (CIBIL), Fair Practices Code for
Debt Collection and Banking Codes and Standards Board of India 87
11. Recent Developments in the Indian Financial System 95
MODULE B: FUNCTIONS OF BANKS
12. Banker-Customer Relationship 105
13. Banker's Special Relationship123
14. Payment and Collection of Cheques and Other Negotiable Instruments 131
15. Opening of Accounts of Various Types of Customers 143
16. Ancillary Services 151
17. Principles of Lending, Working Capital Assessment and Credit Monitoring159
18. Priority Sector Advances 171
19. Agricultural Finance 177
20. Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises in India 183
21. Government Sponsored Schemes 189
22. Self-Help Groups 203
23. Credit Cards, Home Loans, Personal Loans, Consumer Loans 209
24. Documentation . 219
XII
25. Different Modes of Charging Securities 225
26. Types of Collaterals and their Characteristics 235
27. Non-Performing Assets 245
28. Financial Inclusion 255
MODULE - C: BANKING TECHNOLOGY
29. Essentials of Bank Computerisation 263
30. Payment Systems and Electronic Banking 279
31. Data Communication Network and EFT Systems 297
32. Role of Technology Upgradation and its Impact on Banks 319
33. Security Considerations 331
MODULE - D: SUPPORT SERVICES - MARKETING OF
BANKING SERVICES/PRODUCTS
34. Marketing - An Introduction 357
35. Consumer Behaviour and Product 375
36. Pricing 395
37. Distribution 411
38. Channel Management 421
39. Promotion 425
40. Role of Direct Selling Agent/Direct Marketing Agent in a Bank 433
41. Marketing Information Systems - A Longitudinal Analysis 451
441Abbreviations 455
Glossary 471
Banking Terms Marketing Terms Information Technology 475
Bibliography 479
INDIAN FINANCIAL SYSTEM
Unit 1. Indian Financial System - An Overview Unit 2. Banking Regulation
Unit 3. Retail Banking, Wholesale and International Banking, ADR, GDR and Participatory
Notes
Unit 4. Role and Functions of Capital Market, Securities and Exchange Board of India
(SEBI)
Unit 5. Role and Functions of Mutual Funds
Unit 6. Role and Functions of Insurance Companies, Bancassurance and Insurance
Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA)
Unit 7. Factoring, Forfaiting Services and Off-Balance Items
Unit 8. Risk Management and BASEL II - An Overview
Unit 9. Alliances/Mergers/Consolidation
Unit 10. Credit Information Bureau (India) Limited (CIBIL), Fair Practices Code for Debt
Collection and Banking Codes and Standards Board of India
Unit 11. Recent Developments in the Indian Financial System
UNIT 1 An Overview
STRUCTURE
1.0 Objectives
1.1 What is a Financial System?
1.1.1 Roles and Functions in Brief of the Central Banking Authority
1.1.2 Commercial Banks
1.1.3 Non-Banking Financial Companies (NBFCs)
1.1.4 Primary Dealers (PDs)
1.1.5 Financial Institutions (FIs)
1.1.6 Cooperative Banks
1.1.7 Payment and Settlement System
1.1.8 Management of Government Debt
1.1.9 Bankers to Government
1.1.10 Lender of Last Resort to Banks
1.1.11 Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR)
1.1.12 Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR)
1.2 Equity and Debt Market
1.2.1 Stock Exchanges
1.2.2 Brokers
1.2.3 Equity and Debt Raisers
1.2.4 Investment Bankers (Merchant Bankers)
1.2.5 Foreign Institutional Investors (FIIs)
1.2.6 Depositories
1.2.7 Mutual Funds
1.2.8 Registrars
1.3 Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA)
1.4 Let Us Sum Up
1.5 Check Your Progress
1.6 Answers to 'Check Your Progress'
1.0 OBJECTIVES
This unit gives an overview about the financial system, its role and constituents of the system
in the country.
1.1 WHAT IS A FINANCIAL SYSTEM?
A financial system means the structure that is available in an economy to mobilise the capital
from various surplus sectors of the economy and allocate and distribute the same to the
various needy sectors. The transformation of 'Savings' into 'Investments and Consumption' is
facilitated by the active role played by the financial system. The process of transformation is
aided by various types of financial assets suiting the individual needs and demands of both
the 'investors' and 'spenders'. The offering of these diverse types of financial assets is
supported by the role of 'financial intermediaries' who invariably intermediate between these
two segments of investors and spenders. Examples of intermediaries are banks, financial
institutions, mutual funds, etc. The place where these activities take place could be taken to
connote the financial market.
Figure 1.1 represents the various segments of the financial market.
The financial system comprises a mixture of intermediaries, markets and instruments that are
related to each other. It provides a system by which savings are transformed into investments.
To simplify, the overall financial system can be presented diagrammatically as shown in
Figure 1.2.
1.1.1 Roles and Functions in Brief of the Central Banking
Authority
The Central Banking Authority (Reserve Bank of India) has two distinct roles; Monetary
control including controlling inflation and bank supervision. All major central banks other
countries too look after these two functions and carry the charge of ensuring that the overall
financial health of banks is not impaired. This is ensured through off-site and on-site
surveillance of banks. Monetary control is exercised through Cash Reserve Ratio and
Statutory Liquidity Ratio mechanism and Bank and Repo rates - main instruments available
to Central Banks to control Prime rates of leading banks. Central Banks do act as lenders of
last resort to banking system and are responsible for ensuring an efficient payment and
settlement system.
1. Monetary control
2. Supervision over
• Commercial Banks
•NBFCs
• Primary Dealers
• Financial Institutions
• Cooperative Banks
• Clearing and Settlement System
3. Management of government debt
4. Banker to government
5. Lender of last resort to banks
6. Regulating money markets through monetary instruments (CRR, SLR, BANK
RATE, REPO RATE)
1. Equity market and debt market supervision and control.
2. Supervision over
• Stock exchanges
• Brokers
• Equity and debt raisers
• Investment bankers (merchant bankers)
• Foreign institutional investors
• Custodians
• Depositories
• Mutual funds
• Listed companies
• Service providers to capital markets like registrars
1. Regulatory framework including rules and regulations for running insurance
business
2. Supervising all insurance companies both in general and life insurance business
3. Regulating pricing, investments and cost structure of insurance companies
4. Regulating insurance brokers including agencies both individuals and banks
PENSIONS
1. Framing rules for pension
funds
2. Regulating all pension funds
Note. 77iis schematic diagram illustrates the various constituents in a financial system and
the broad categories in. which they can be categorised on the basis of activities that they
perform.
1.1.2Commercial Banks
Commercial banks include public sector banks, foreign banks, and private sector banks.
Acceptance of deposits from the public for the purpose of lending or investment is the main
area of activity.
1.1.3Non-Banking Financial Companies (NBFCs)
NBFCs are allowed to raise monies as deposits from the public and lend monies through
various instruments including leasing, hire purchase and bill discounting etc. These are
licensed and supervised by the Central Banking Authority. Central Bank prescribes that no
NBFC can operate without a valid license from the Central Banking Authority.
1.1.4Primary Dealers (PDs)
Primary dealers also known as PDs, deal in government securities and deal in both the
primary and secondary markets. Their basic responsibility is to provide markets for
government securities and strengthen the government securities market.
1.1.5Financial Institutions (FIs)
FIs are development financial institutions which provide long-term funds for industry and
agriculture. All these institutions are under off-site and on-site surveillance of the Central
Banking Authority. FIs raise their resources through long-term bonds from the financial
system and borrowings from international financial institutions.
1.1.6Cooperative Banks
These are allowed to raise deposits and give advances from and to the public. Urban
Cooperative Banks are controlled by State governments and RBI, while other cooperative
banks are controlled by National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD)
and State Governments. Except for certain exemptions in paying a higher interest on deposits,
the Urban Cooperative Banks regulatory framework is similar to the other banks.
1.1.7Payment and Settlement System
An efficient and effective Payment and Settlement System is a necessary condition for a well
running Financial System. Maintenance of clearing houses at various centres, creation of
currency holding chests in different geographical areas and creation of the mechanism for
electronic transfer of funds are vital activities undertaken by the Central Banks.
1.1.8Management of Government Debt
Most of the Central Banks manage the issue and servicing of government debt. This involves
price discovery, volumes to be raised, tenure of debt and matching it with the overall cash
management of the debt.
1.1.9Bankers to Government
Most of the Central Banks maintain an account, Government deposit and carry out their cash
management through the issue of Bonds and Treasury Bills.
1.1.10 Lender of Last Resort to Banks
The Central Bank provides liquidity support on a temporary basis through the facility of
repurchase (REPO) of securities to banks to meet their short-term liquidity requirements.
1.1.11 Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR)
Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) is the mandatory deposit to be held by Banks with the requisite
monetary authority. It is a percentage of their Demand and Time liabilities. The increase or
decrease can be effected by the Central Bank to pump in or soak liquidity in the banking
system.
1.1.12 Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR)
Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) is the prescribed percentage of Demand and Time liabilities
of a bank to be held in prescribed securities, mostly government securities. The increase or
decrease in the CRR & SLR, contracts and enhances credit creation.
1.2 EQUITY AND DEBT MARKET
Marketability of corporate securities, i.e. bonds, debentures, and convertible debentures,
enables corporates to raise debt, while debenture holders enjoy very high liquidity. All
securities quoted on stock exchanges and freely bought and sold on these exchanges can be
issued only after obtaining approval of the capital market regulator viz., SEBI.
1.2.1 Stock Exchanges
A stock exchange is duly approved by the regulators to provide sale and purchase of
securities on behalf of investors. The stock exchanges provide clearing house facilities for
netting of payments and securities delivery. Clearing houses guarantee all payments and
deliveries. Securities include equities, debt and derivatives.
1.2.2 Brokers
Only brokers approved by the capital market regulator can operate on the stock exchange.
Brokers perform the job of intermediating between buyers and sellers of securities. They help
build-up an order book, carry out price discovery and are responsible for brokers' contracts
being honoured. The services are subject to brokerage.
1.2.3 Equity and Debt Raisers
Companies wishing to raise equity or debt through stock exchanges have to approach a
capital market regulator with the prescribed applications and a *proforma prospectus for
permission to raise equity and debt and to get them listed on a stock exchange.
1.2.4 Investment Bankers (Merchant Bankers)
Merchant banks undertake a number of activities such as undertaking the issue of stocks,
fund raising and management. They also provide advisory services and counsel on mergers
and acquisitions etc. They are licensed by the capital market regulators.
1.2.5 Foreign Institutional Investors (FIIs)
FIIs are foreign-based funds authorised by the Capital Market Regulator to invest in the
Indian equity and debt market through stock exchanges.
1.2.6 Depositories
Depositories hold securities in demat form (as opposed to physical form), maintain accounts
of depository participants who, in turn, maintain sub-accounts of their customers. On
instructions of the stock exchange clearing house, supported by documentation, a depository
transfers securities from the buyers to sellers accounts in electronic form.
1.2.7 Mutual Funds
A mutual fund is a form of Collective Investment that pools money from investors and
invests in Stocks, Debt and other Securities. It is a less risky investment option for an
individual investor. Mutual funds require the regulators approval to start an asset
management company (the fund) and each scheme has to be approved by the regulator before
it is launched.
1.2.8 Registrars
Registrars maintain a register of share and debenture holders and process share and debenture
allocation, when issues are subscribed. Registrars too need regulators approval to do
business.
1.3 INSURANCE REGULATORY AND DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY (IRDA)
Regulator for Insurance business, both general and life assurance. Regulates all aspects of
insurance business, including licensing of insurance companies, framing regulations about the
conduct of business and supervising all insurance activities in the country etc.
1.4 LET US SUM UP
The financial system comprises a mixture of intermediaries, markets and instruments that are
related to each other. It provides a system by which savings are transformed into investments.
The RBI (Reserve Bank of India), being the Central Banking Authority, exercises monetary
control and supervises the banking institutions. Different institutions such as Commercial
Banks, Non-Banking Finance Companies, Mutual Funds, Insurance companies, primary
dealers, brokers, depositories and insurance agents, also different markets such as the capital
market and the money market are part of the financial system. The three regulatory
authorities viz., RBI, SEBI and IRDA are controlling and supervising the banking, capital
market and insurance sectors respectively.
ANNEXURES
FIGURE A1.1: Organisation Chart of a Public Sector Bank
FIGURE A1.3: Distribution Channels of a Branch
1.5 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS
1. State whether following statements are True or False.
False: SEBI: a) RBI has direct supervision over depositories and mutual funds.
True: b) Monetary control is exercised through Cash Reserve Ratio and Statutory Liquidity
Ratio.
False: Government Securities: c) Primary dealers mainly deal in shares, mutual fund units
etc.
False: RBI: d) Issue and servicing of government debt is managed by commercial banks.
False: increases: e) The decrease in Statutory Liquidity Ratio contracts the credit creation.
2. Choose the correct word(s) from the bracket and complete the sentence.
a) Depositories hold securities in-demat-form, (demat, physical)
b) Cash Reserve Ratio is the-mandetory-deposit to be held by Banks with RBI. (voluntary,
mandatory)
c) The-stock exchanges-provide clearing house facilities for netting of payments and
securities delivery, (primary dealers, stock exchanges).
d) Urban Cooperative Banks are controlled by-State Governments-and-RBI-.
NABARD, State Governments, RBI, SEBI).
e) Leasing, hire purchase and bill discounting are the domain of-Non-BankingFinance
Companies-(Non-BankingFinance Companies, mutual funds, commercial banks)
3. Terminal questions.
(a) Distinguish between Banks and Non-Banking Finance Companies.
(b) Write a short note on the Indian financial system.
(c) Elucidate the role of RBI.
(d) What services are provided by merchant bankers? Are investment bankers and
merchant bankers the same?
(e) Write in brief the role of Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA).
1.6 ANSWERS TO ‘CHECK YOUR PROGRESS'
1. True or false.
(a) False (Hint: SEBI) b) ( True)
(c) False (Hint: Govt. Securities) (d) False (Hint: RBI)
(e) False (Hint: increases credit creation)
2. Choose the correct words,
(a) Demat
(b) Mandatory
(c) Stock Exchanges
(d) State Governments &RBI
UNIT 2 BANKING REGULATION
STRUCTURE
1. 2.0 2.0 Objectives
1. 2.1 2.1 Introduction
2. 2.2 2.2 RBI's Constitution and Objectives
3. 2.3 2.3 RBI's Main Functions
4. 2.3.1 Notes Issuance
5. 2.3.2 Government's Banker
6. 2.3.3 Bankers' Bank
7. 2.3.4 Bank's Supervision
8. 2.3.5 Development of the Financial System
9. 2.3.6 Exchange Control
10. 2.3.7 Monetary Control
11. 2.4 2.4 Tools of Monetary Control
12. 2.4.1 Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR)
13. 2.4.2 Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR)
14. 2.4.3 Bank Rate
15. 2.4.4 Open Market Operations (OMOs)
16. 2.4.5 Selective Credit Control (SCC)
17. 2.5 2.5 Other Tools
18. 2.6 2.6 Regulatory Restrictions on Lending
19. 2.7 2.7 Let Us Sum Up
20. 2.8 2.8 Check Your Progress
21. 2.9 2.9 Answers to 'Check Your Progress'
22. 2.10 2.10 Keywords
2.0 OBJECTIVES
After going through this unit, you should get an understanding of the various tools and
techniques of banking regulation exercised by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI), which affect
the functioning of commercial banks in India. This Unit would help you to better appreciate
the basics of banking in India and would acquaint you with:
• Constitution and objectives of the RBI,
• Functions of the RBI as the regulator of the Indian Banking System,
• Monetary tools of the RBI and their effect on banks,
• Priority Sector Advances - their composition and rationale, and
• Regulatory Restrictions on Bank Lending.
2.1 INTRODUCTION
In Unit 1, you have observed that the banking system in India is regulated by the Reserve
Bank of India as the central banking authority in the country. Banking regulation is not
peculiar to India, as the banking system of every country is regulated by some authority in
terms of the laws of the country concerned. Even in the United Kingdom, where banking has
not been defined under any statute book, the banking system is regulated by the Bank of
England as the central banking authority in terms of an enactment. In India too the banking
system is regulated by the Reserve Bank of India, in terms of the Reserve Bank of India Act,
1934 and the Banking Regulation Act, 1949.
A reasonable regulation of the banking system is essential to check the imprudence of the
players, which can erode the confidence of the public in the banking system. The financial
system deals with the people's money and it is necessary to generate, maintain and promote
the confidence and trust of the people in the banking system at all times and with great care
by preventing and curbing all possibilities of misuse and even imprudence by any of the
players of the financial system. Thus, the rationale behind regulation of the financial/banking
system is:
• To generate, maintain and promote confidence and trust of the public in the
financial/banking system.
• To protect investor's interests by adequate/timely disclosure by the institutions and
access to information by the investors.
• To ensure that the financial markets are both fair and efficient.
• To ensure that the participants measure up to the rules of the marketplace.
In India, which is a developing country, the role of the banking regulator (RBI), as also of the
securities market regulator (Securities and Exchange Board of India - SEBI), is more crucial
in achieving the aforesaid objectives of a stable banking/financial system. RBI has the added
responsibility to smoothen and aid the process of economic development of the country via
the banking system in tune with the national economic policies.
The foregoing objectives of the banking system with reference to the RBI would be discussed
in this Unit. The RBI's statutory objectives and regulatory functions and tools would be
explained in this Unit to enable you to better understand the various facets of banking that
would be dealt with in the subsequent units.
2.2 RBI's CONSTITUTION AND OBJECTIVES
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) was constituted under the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934
and started functioning with effect from 1 April, 1935. RBI is the oldest among the central
banks operating in developing countries, though it is much younger than the Bank of England
and the Federal Reserve Board operating as the central banks in UK and USA respectively,
being developed countries.
RBI is a state owned institution under the Reserve Bank (Transfer of Public Ownership) of
India Act, 1948. This Act empowers the Union Government, in consultation with the
Governor of the RBI, to issue such directions to RBI as considered necessary in public
interest. The Governor and four Deputy Governors of RBI are appointed by the Union
Government. The control of the RBI vests in the Central Board of Directors, that comprises
the Governor, four Deputy Governors and 15 Directors nominated by the Union Government.
The RBI's internal management is based on functional specialisation and coordination
amongst about 20 departments, with headquarters at Mumbai, which is the financial capital of
the country.
The main objectives of the RBI are contained in the preamble of the RBI Act, 1934. It reads
'Whereas it is expedient to constitute a Reserve Bank for India to regulate the issue of bank
notes and keeping of reserves with a view to securing monetary stability in India and
generally to operate the currency and credit system of the country to its advantage'. The main
objectives of RBI may be stated as follows in specific terms:
I. To maintain monetary stability such that the business and economic life of the country can
deliver the welfare gains of a mixed economy,
II. To maintain financial stability and ensure sound financial institutions so that economic
units can conduct their business with confidence,
III. To maintain stable payment systems, so that financial transactions can be safely and
efficiently executed,
IV. To ensure that credit allocation by the financial system broadly reflects the national
economic priorities and social concerns,
V. To regulate the overall volume of money and credit in the economy to ensure a
reasonable degree of price stability,
VI. To promote the development of financial markets and systems to enable itself to
operate/regulate efficiently.
2.3 RBI's MAIN FUNCTIONS
We will now discuss the essential functions of RBI that help it to achieve the objectives
mentioned above. These are as follows:
2.3.1 Notes Issuance
RBI has the sole authority for the issuance of currency notes and putting them into
circulation, withdrawing them or exchanging them. RBI has issued and put in circulation
notes in the denomination of Rs. 2, 5, 10, 20, 50, 100, 500 and 1000, except Rs. 1 notes and
all coins, which are issued by the Government of India, but put into circulation by RBI. The
RBI has about seventeen Issue Offices and above 4,000 currency chests where new and
reissuable notes are stored. The currency chests are kept by various banking groups as agents
of RBI. The RBI Group has over 2,800 currency chests, Nationalised banks have about 800,
Treasuries about 420 and private sector banks have about 20 currency chests. As a cover for
the notes issue, RBI keeps a minimum value of gold coin, bullion and foreign securities as a
part of the total approved assets.
2.3.2 Government's Banker
RBI acts as the banker to the Central and State Governments. As such, it provides them
banking services of deposits, withdrawal of funds, making payments and receipts, collection
and transfer of funds and management of public debt. Government deposits are received free
of interest and RBI does not receive any remuneration for the routine banking business of the
government. RBI also makes 'ways and means advance' to central and state governments,
subject to certain rules and limits on the amount of overdrafts with a view to contain the
fiscal deficit as decided by the central government. RBI charges a commission for managing
the public debt and interest on overdrafts from the concerned governments.
2.3.3 Bankers' Bank
Every central bank acts as a bankers' bank and so does RBI. The commercial banks and state
cooperative banks which are scheduled banks (appearing in the second schedule of the RBI
Act) have to keep stipulated reserves in cash and in approved securities as a percentage of
their Demand and Time Liabilities (DTL). These reserves, as discussed in a later section of
this Unit, regulate the banks' ability to create credit and affect money supply in the economy.
RBI also changes its Bank Rate to regulate the cost of bank credit and thereby its volume
indirectly. RBI also acts as a 'lender of the last resort' for banks by rediscounting bills and by
refinance mechanism for certain kinds of credit, subject to the conditions laid down in its
Credit Policy announced by annually.
2.3.4 Bank's Supervision
From November 1993, RBI's banking supervisory function has been separated from its
traditional central banking functions. The Board of Financial Supervision (BFS) was set up in
1994 to oversee the Indian Financial System, comprising not only commercial banks, state
cooperative banks, but also the All India Financial Institutions (AIFIs) and Non-Banking
Finance Companies (NBFCs). The BFS has a full time vice-chairman and six other members,
apart from the RBI Governor as its chairman.
RBI's supervisory powers over commercial banks are quite wide as mentioned below and
their objective is to develop a sound banking system in the country:
i) To issue licences for new banks and new branches for the existing banks,
ii) To prescribe the minimum requirements for the paid-up capital and reserves, maintenance
of cash reserves and other liquid assets,
iii) To inspect the working of the scheduled banks in India and abroad from all relevant
angles to ensure their sound working.
iv) To conduct ad hoc investigations into complaints, irregularities and frauds pertaining to
the banks.
v) To control appointments, reappointments, termination of Chairmen and CEOs of private
banks.
vi) To approve or force amalgamation or merger of two banks. The recent example is the
merger of Global Trust Bank with Oriental Bank of Commerce, after the RBI's moratorium
(freezing) of the former in early 2004.
2.3.5 Development of the Financial System
This represents RBI's developmental role as against its regulatory and supervisory role over
banks as mentioned above. RBI has created specialised financial institutions for:
i) Industrial finance: Industrial Development Bank of India (IDBI) in 1964, Small Industries
Development Bank of India (SIDBI) in 1989.
ii) Agricultural credit: National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) in
1981.
iii) Export-import finance: Export-Import Bank of India (EXIM Bank) in 1981.
iv) Deposits Insurance Corporation of India in 1961, which later became Deposit Insurance
and Credit Guarantee Corporation of India (DICGC).
RBI has also initiated several schemes connected with various facets of banking which have
significantly impacted the banking development in the country over the last five decades.
Some of these are as follows:
i) Bill Market Scheme of 1952 and 1970.
ii) Lead Bank Scheme for backward districts development (1970s),
iii)P.L. Tandon Committee on Inventory norms for Bank Credit, 1974.*
iv) Credit Authorisation Scheme (1960s).*
v) Consortium Financing Scheme (1970s).*
vi) Priority Sector Advances Scheme (discussed later in this Unit).
Note: The schemes marked with an asterisk (*) have been discontinued after the liberalisation
since 1991.
RBI has also tried to integrate the large unorganised financial sector (indigenous bankers,
various kinds of non-banking finance companies etc.) into the organised financial system by
regulating them to some extent. However, the task is so enormous and complex that it will
take longer for RBI to have the desired integration of the two sectors, so as to work as a
single financial system in the country.
2.3.6 Exchange Control
RBI is entrusted with the duty of maintaining the stability of the external value of the national
Currency - Indian Rupee. It used to regulate the foreign exchange market in the country in
terms of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act (FERA), 1947 (amended and enlarged in
1973). The FERA, 1973 has been replaced by the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999
(FEMA) and RBI is now guided by the provisions of the new Act. The RBI performs the
following tasks:
i) It administers foreign exchange control through its Exchange-Control Department. It
authorizes the bank's specified branches and other dealers, called Authorised Dealers (ADs)
to deal in the prescribed kinds of foreign exchange transactions and issues the AD series of
circulars for regulating such transactions.
ii) It manages the exchange rate between the Indian Rupee and foreign currencies, by selling
and buying foreign exchange to/from the Authorised Dealers and by other means,
iii) It manages the foreign exchange reserves of the country and maintains reserves in gold
and foreign securities issued by foreign governments and international financial institutions.
2.3.7 Monetary Control
The RBI controls the money supply, volume of bank credit and also cost of bank credit (via
the Bank Rate) and thereby the overall money supply in the economy. Money supply change
is a technique of controlling inflationary or deflationary situations in the economy. The RBI
issues monetary policy for the country as the Ministry of Finance issues fiscal policy and the
Ministry of Commerce issues the EXIM policy of the country from time to time. All these
policies are among the important macroeconomic policies that influence various businesses in
the country. RBI issues monetary and credit policies annually.
2.4 TOOLS OF MONETARY CONTROL
RBI uses its monetary policy for controlling inflationary or deflationary situations in the
economy by using one or more of the following tools of monetary control. These are
discussed below.
2.4.1 Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR)
It refers to the cash that all banks (scheduled and non-scheduled) are required to maintain
with RBI as a certain percentage of their demand and time liabilities (DTL). As you know,
demand liabilities of a bank represent its deposits which are payable on demand of the
depositors (viz., current and savings deposits) and time liabilities refer to its time deposits
which are repayable on the specified maturities. In order to meet these liabilities in time (i.e.
to keep liquidity), a bank has to keep a regulatory cash reserve with RBI (currently, it is 6.5
per cent for scheduled commercial banks). If a bank fails to maintain the prescribed CRR at
prescribed intervals, it has to pay penal interest on the shortfall by adjustment from the
interest receivable on the balances with RBI. A cut in the CRR enhances loanable funds with
banks and reduces their dependence on the call and term money market. This will bring down
the call rates. An increase in CRR will squeeze the liquidity in the banking system and reduce
their lending operations and the call rate will tend to increase.
2.4.2 Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR)
It refers to the supplementary liquid reserve requirements of banks, in addition to CRR. SLR
is maintained by all banks (scheduled and non-scheduled) in the form of cash in hand
(exclusive of the minimum CRR), current account balances with SBI and other public sector
commercial banks, unencumbered approved securities and gold. RBI can prescribe SLR from
0 per cent to 40 per cent of bank's DTL (presently it is 25 per cent). SLR has three objectives:
• To restrict expansion of banks' credit,
• To increase banks' investment in approved securities and
• To ensure solvency of banks.
The effect of an increase in SLR by RBI is the reduction in the lending capacity of banks by
pre-empting (blocking) a certain portion of their DTL for government or other approved
securities. It has therefore a deflationary impact on the economy, not only by reducing the
supply of loanable funds of banks, but also by increasing the lending rates in the face of an
increasing demand for bank credit. The reverse phenomena happens in case of a cut in SLR.
2.4.3 Bank Rate
Bank Rate is the standard rate at which RBI is prepared to buy or rediscount bills of exchange
or other eligible commercial paper from banks. It is the basic cost of rediscounting and
refinance facilities from RBI. The Bank Rate is therefore used by RBI to affect the cost and
availability of refinance and to change the loanable resources of banks and other financial
institutions. Change in the Bank Rate by RBI affects the interest rates on loans and deposits
in the banking system across the board in the same direction, if not to the same extent. After
deregulation and banking reforms since 1991, RBI has gradually loosened its direct
regulation of deposit and lending rates and these are left to banks to decide through their
boards, with only a few exceptions. However, RBI can still affect the interest rates via
changes in its Bank Rate, whenever the situation of the economy warrants it.
2.4.4 Open Market Operations (OMOs)
This refers to sale or purchase of government securities (of Central or State governments or
both) by RBI in the open market with a view to increase or decrease the liquidity in the
banking system and thereby affect the loanable funds with banks. RBI can also alter the
interest rate structure through its pricing policy for open market sale/purchase.
2.4.5 Selective Credit Control (SCC)
The RBI issues directives, under Sections 21 and 35A of the Banking Regulation Act,
stipulating certain restrictions on bank advances against specified sensitive commodities as
follows:
Pulses, other food grains (viz., coarse grains), oilseeds, oils including vanaspati, all imported
oil seeds and oils, sugar including imported sugar (excepting buffer stocks and unreleased
stock of sugar with sugar mills), Gur and Khandsari, Cotton and Kapas, Paddy/Rice and
Wheat.
RBI's objective in issuing Selective Credit Control (SCC) directives is to prevent speculative
holding of essential commodities and the resultant rise in their prices. RBI's general
guidelines on SCC are:
(i) anks should not allow customers dealing in SCC commodities any credit facilities
including against book debts/receivables or even collateral securities like
insurance policies, shares, stocks and real estate) that would directly or indirectly
defeat the purpose of the SCC directives,
(ii) Credit limits against each commodity covered by SCC directives should be segregated
and the SCC restrictions be applied to each of such segregated limits.
Presently, only buffer stocks of sugar, unreleased stocks of sugar with sugar mills
representing free sale sugar and levy sugar are covered by SCC directives.
2.5 OTHER TOOLS
RBI has used other tools of regulation in the past. However, after the liberalisation policy of
1991, most of these tools have since been discontinued and are no longer used by RBI. These
tools are:
• Credit Rationing/Allocation • Credit Authorisation Scheme
• Credit Planning • Inventory and Credit Norms
2.6 REGULATORY RESTRICTIONS ON LENDING
There are certain regulatory restrictions on lending by banks in terms of RBI directives or the
Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (BRA) as follows:
i) No advance or loan can be granted against the security of the bank's own shares or partly
paid shares of a company,
ii) No bank can hold shares in a company:
a) As pledgee or mortgagee in excess of the limit of 30 per cent of the Paid-up capital of that
company or 30 per cent of the Bank's Paid-up capital and Reserves, whichever is less (Sec.
19(ii) of BRA).
b) in the management of which Managing Director or Manager of the Bank is interested (Sec.
19(iii) of BRA).
iii) Bank's aggregate investment in shares, Certificate of Deposits (CDs), bonds, etc., should
not exceed the limit of 40 per cent of Bank's net owned funds as at the end of the previous
year,
iv) No bank should grant loans against:
a) CDs
b) FDs issued by other banks
c) Money Market Mutual Funds
(v) Bank should adhere to the RBI guidelines relating to the level of credit, margin and
interest rate etc. for loans against the security of commodities covered by the Selective Credit
Control Directives of RBI. No loan should be granted by banks to:
• The Bank's directors or firms in which a director is interested as a
partner/manager/employee/guarantor (certain exemptions allowed).
• Relatives of other bank's directors ('relatives' defined by RBI) - Such loans can be
sanctioned by higher authorities or the Bank's Board as per RBI guidelines.
vi) Banks should not sanction a new or additional facility to borrowers appearing in RBI's list
of "Willful Defaulters" for a period of 5 years from the date of publication of the list by RBI.
2.7 LET US SUM UP
Reserve Bank of India is the central banking authority and regulator of the Indian Banking
System, like the Federal Reserve Board in USA and Bank of England in UK. RBI was
constituted under the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 and it draws its regulatory powers
from this Act and also the Banking Regulation Act. RBI's main objectives are to maintain
financial solvency and liquidity in the banking system,
stability in the exchange rate and internal value of the Rupee, to regulate the volume and flow
of bank credit in tune with the national priorities and to develop financial institutions on
sound lines.
RBI performs multifarious functions to achieve the above said objectives. Its main functions
include Notes Issuance, Government's Banker, Bankers' Bank, Banks' Supervision,
Development of the Financial System, Exchange Control, and Monetary Control.
RBI's main tools of Monetary Control are Cash Reserve Ratio, Statutory Liquidity Ratio,
Open Market Operations, Bank Rate and Selective Credit Control. RBI uses these tools
singly or in combination to control and rectify specific monetary situations in the economy or
banking system from time to time. These measures affect the volume and cost of bank credit,
besides maintaining the stability of the financial system.
In accordance with the government policy of poverty alleviation and improving the economic
condition of the disadvantaged sections of the society, RBI has directed banks to lend to the
specified Priority Sector with a minimum target of 40 per cent of their Net bank credit, with
specified sub-targets for agriculture, weaker sections and the very poor sections of the
society. Certain concessions in the lending terms and operations have also been prescribed by
RBI for Priority Sector Advances.
There are also certain regulatory restrictions prescribed by RBI on lending by banks in terms
of the Banking Regulation Act and also on grounds of prudence and to prevent abuse of bank
credit.
2.8 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS
1. State whether each of the following statements are 'True' or 'False'.
T: a) RBI is the regulator of banks and the securities market in India.
T: b) RBI started functioning from 1934 and onwards.
T: c) RBI maintains the financial stability of financial institutions in India.
F: (d) Notes in the denomination from Rupee 1 to Rupees 1000 are issued by RBI.
F: e) RBI appoints the CEOs of private sector banks.
F: f) RBI has no power to amalgamate weaker banks with strong banks.
F: g) Credit Authorisation and Consortium of Finance schemes of RBI are still mandatory
for commercial banks in India.
F: h) RBI currently draws its powers of regulating exchange control from FERA, 1973.
F: i) All scheduled bank branches can handle foreign exchange transactions.
F: j) SLR is lower than CRR.
*(k) As there is no sub-target for the SSI sector, it does not comprise the Priority Sector.
2. Fill in the blanks in the following sentences with appropriate word(s).
a) The Indian Banking System is regulated in terms of the provisions of ,
Act, 1934 and Act, 1949.
b) In USA and UK, the banking regulators are
And respectively.
c) RBI is a owned institution.
d) The Central Board of Directors of RBI comprises one ------------, four and fifteen
-------------.
e) New and reissuable notes are stored in -------- ----------- maintained by banks as
of RBI.
(f) RBI acts as the to the Central and Governments.
(g) In the Indian Banking System, RBI acts as the bank and also as lender of the
---------- ----------------.
(h) A decrease in the Bank Rate is likely to lead to a ----- in interest rates of banks.
(i) Monetary and Credit policy is issued by ------ each year ---- times.
(j) A decrease in CRR will -------. the liquidity in the banking system.
(k) To control inflationary situation in the economy, RBI can increase one or more of
these monetary tool ---- or/ and ----- or / and -------.
3. Write the full form of the following acronyms.
ADs DTL PSA
(a) FERA (b) FEMA (c)
(d) CRR (e) SLR (f)
(g) OMO (h) SCC (i)
(j) SSI (k) DRI
4. Terminal Questions.
(a) Explain precisely the various reasons for regulating the banking system in a country.
(b) Enumerate the main supervisory powers of RBI over commercial banks.
(c) Explain the effect of an increase in the CRR and SLR on the banking system. Can
RBI use
both of these monetary tools simultaneously?
(d) Does RBI have the power to control or influence directly or indirectly the interest
rates of
banks in India and if so, in what manner and to what extent?
(e) Give at least eight examples of the Priority Sector. Also explain the rationale of PSA.
2.9 ANSWERS TO CHECK YOUR PROGRESS'
(a) False
(d) False
(g) False
(j) False
1. (a) Reserve Bank of India; Banking Regulation
(b) Federal Reserve Board; Bank of England
(c) State
(d) Governor; Deputy Governors; Directors
(e) Currency Chests; agents (f) Banker; State
(g) Bankers'; last resort (h) Decrease
(i) RBI; two (j) Improve
(k) CRR; SLR; Bank Rate
3. (a) Foreign Exchange Regulation Act (c) Authorised Dealers (e) Statutory Liquidity Ratio
(g) Open Market Operations (i) Priority Sector Advances (k) Differential Rate of Interest
(b) False
(e) True
(h) False
(k) False
(b) Foreign Exchange Management Act
(d) Cash Reserve Ratio
(f) Demand and Time Liabilities
(h) Selective Credit Control
(j) Small Scale Industries
(c) True
(f) False
(i) False
(b) Foreign Exchange Management Act
(d) Cash Reserve Ratio
(f) Demand and Time Liabilities
(h) Selective Credit Control
(j) Small Scale Industries
2.10 KEYWORDS
Monetary Stability, Payment System, Board of Financial Supervision, Cash Reserve Ratio
(CRR), Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR), Bank Rate, Open Market Operations (OMO),
Priority Sector, Exchange Control.
Unit 3 RETAIL BANKING, WHOLESALE AND
INTERNATIONAL BANKING, ADR, GDR AND
PARTICIPATORY NOTES
STRUCTURE
3.0 Objectives
3.1 Retail Banking
3.1.1 Introduction to Retail Banking in India
3.1.2 What is Retail Banking?
3.1.3 Retail Products
3.1.4 Drivers of Retail Business in India
3.1.5 Opportunities of Retail Banking in India
3.2 Wholesale Banking and International Banking
3.2.1 What is Wholesale Banking?
3.2.2 Products
3.3 International Banking
3.3.1 Introduction
3.3.2 Needs of Exporters
3.3.3 Requirements of Importers
3.3.4 Remittance Services
3.4 Universal Banking
3.4.1 Progress of Universal Banking in India
3.5 American Depository Receipts (ADRs) and Global Depository
Receipts (GDRs)
3.5.1 Deposit Receipt Mechanism
3.5.2 The Benefits of Depository Receipts
3.6 Participatory Notes
3.7 Check Your Progress
3.8 Answers to 'Check Your Progress'
3.9 Keywords
3.0 OBJECTIVES
A study of this unit will help you to:
• know the concept, products, drivers of growth and opportunities of retail banking.
• have a glimpse of various products under wholesale banking.
• understand the meaning of international banking and different products.
• know about the financial instruments called ADRs and GDRs and its working.
• familiarise with participatory notes.
3.1 RETAIL BANKING
3.1.1Introduction to Retail Banking in India
Commercial Banks deal with different types of customers like individuals, sole
proprietor/partnership firms, clubs, associations, trusts, schools, private limited companies
and public limited companies etc. Until the late 1990s, banks have been mobilising deposits
from all these customers but were lending mainly to the trade and industry only. In fact, the
approach of the Government and the Reserve Bank of India was focussed at ensuring that the
nation's scarce resources were directed towards production-oriented economic activities and
bank financing to consumption expenses was discouraged. As a result, banks were reluctant
to finance individuals for their consumption needs. However, under priority sector lending,
banks were liberally financing individuals for agriculture and allied activities and also under
various government sponsored schemes for their economic and financial upliftment. Hence,
individual customers as a separate market segment were not thought of by bankers.
With the ushering in of economic reforms in India during the early 1990s, the banking sector
was opened up to the private sector and the entire sector has been deregulated gradually. This
resulted in operational flexibility and functional autonomy for the banks but competition also
became very keen amongst the players. With liberalisation, the Indian economy also started
growing fast and helped by the huge flow of foreign direct investments and foreign
institutional investments into India, the liquidity in the banking system has improved a lot.
The retail lending, especially, in emerging economies, showed a remarkable growth in the
1990s mainly due to rapid advances in information technology, the evolving macroeconomic
environment, financial market reform and several micro-level demand and supply-side
factors. With world-class technology, the private sector banks became very aggressive in
business and to keep pace with them and to effectively counter competition, the public sector
banks also followed them.
Liberalisation of the Indian economy, which has a young population, has led to increased
incomes, and purchasing power, aspirations for a better lifestyle and expectations of higher
quality products and services (a result of increasing influence of international trends and
preference for international brands). The average Indian, who had a strong aversion to credit,
is now in favour of credit for convenience in shopping, for financing housing, automobiles
and consumer durables and even holidays. The stigma attached to debt has declined
substantially. Consumerism is growing and the credit culture is here to stay.
3.1.2What is Retail Banking?
The banks also were in desperate need for augmenting their lending portfolio and also to
diversify their portfolio risk. Banks took this opportunity to cater to the multiple banking
requirements of the individuals by segmenting the individuals as a separate business market
and called it by the name of 'Retail Banking'. Thus, we can define Retail Banking as doing
banking business with individual customers.
Retail banking is, however, quite broad in nature - it refers to the dealing of commercial
banks with individual customers, both on liabilities and assets sides of the balance sheet.
Fixed, current/savings accounts on the liabilities side; and personal loans, housing, auto
loans, and educational loans on the assets side, are the important products offered by banks.
Related ancillary services include credit cards, debit cards and depository services. Today's
retail banking sector is characterised by three basic features:
1. Multiple products (deposits, credit cards, insurance, investments and securities).
2. Multiple channels of distribution (call centre, branch, Internet and kiosk); and
3. Multiple customer groups (consumer, small business, and corporate).
Retail Products
The typical products offered in the Indian retail banking segment are:
Retail Deposit Products
• Savings Bank Account
• Recurring Deposit
• Recurring Deposit Account
• Current Deposit Account
• Term Deposit Account
• Zero Balance Account for salaried class people
• No Frills Account for the common man
• Senior Citizen Deposit Accounts, etc.
Retail Loan Products
• Home Loans to resident Indians for purchase of land and construction of residential
house/purchase of ready built house/for repairs and renovation of an existing house.
• Home Loans to Non-Resident Indians
• Auto Loans - for purchase of new/used four-wheelers and two-wheelers
• Consumer Loans - for purchase of white goods and durables
• Personal loans - for purchase of jewels, for meeting domestic consumption etc.
• Educational Loans - for pursuing higher education both in India and abroad
• Trade related advances to individuals - for setting up business, retail trade etc.
• Crop loans to agricultural farmers
• Credit Cards etc.
Retail Services
• Safe Deposit Lockers
• Depository Services
• Bancassurance Products etc.
In the recent years, retail lending has turned out to be a key profit driver for banks with a
retail portfolio constituting 21.5 per cent of the total outstanding advances, as on March 2004.
It is reported that the overall impairment of the retail loan portfolio worked out much less
than the Gross NPA ratio for the entire loan portfolio. Within the retail segment, the housing
loans had the least gross asset impairment. In fact, retailing makes ample business sense in
the banking sector.
3.1.4Drivers of Retail Business in India
1. The economic prosperity and the consequent increase in purchasing power has given a
fillip to a consumer boom. During the fourteen years after 1992, India's economy grew at an
average rate of 6.8 per cent and continues to grow at a higher rate - which is unique in the
world.
2. Changing consumer demographics indicate vast potential for growth in consumption both
qualitatively and quantitatively. India is one of the countries having highest proportion (70
percent) of the population below thirty-five years of age (young population). The report of
Goldman Sachs for Brazil, Russia, India and China (BRIC), has predicted a bright future for
India because of this demographic advantage.
3. Convenience banking in the form of debit cards, internet and phone banking, anywhere and
anytime banking has attracted many new customers into the banking field. Technological
innovations relating to increasing use of credit/debit cards, ATMs, direct debits and phone
banking has contributed to the growth of retail banking in India.
4. The interest rate in the economy which was hovering at 12 per cent plus in the 1990s,
suddenly started declining from 2000 onwards to as low as 5 to 6 per cent in 2004. Initially,
this falling interest rate contributed to the growth of retail credit by generating the demand for
such credit. The lowering of interest rates coupled with a robust growth in the economy
resulted in many of the corporates posting higher profits and this resulted in a slow down in
the offtake of credit by them.
5. After the liberalisation of the economy, the Indian banks adopted the best
international practices of accounting and integrated risk management systems. The growth in
the Retail Loans Portfolio also provided banks the opportunity to diversify their risks.
6. Further the delinquency rate, i.e. defaults in respect of retail advances was
comfortably on the lower side when compared to the overall bank loans and advances and
retail loans have put comparatively less of a provisioning burden on banks apart from
diversifying their income streams.
Within the retail segment, the housing loans had the least gross asset impairment.
3.1.5 Opportunities of Retail Banking in India
Retail banking has immense opportunities in a growing economy like India. The rise of the
Indian middle class is an important contributory factor in this regard. With the tremendous
growth experienced by the Indian industries, in particular the software industry and the
retailing sector, the percentage of middle to high-income Indian households is expected to
continue rising. The combination of the above factors promises substantial growth in the
retail sector. Finally, retail banking does not refer to lending only. One should not forget the
role played by retail depositors. The homemaker, the retail shopkeeper, the pensioners, the
self-employed and those employed in the unorganised sector - all need to get a place in the
banks. In recent days, the Reserve Bank of India and the Government of India are very
particular about 'Financial Inclusion' and the entire banking industry is viewing this as an
emerging business opportunity.
On the other hand, rising indebtedness could turn out to be a cause for concern in the future.
Sharing of information about the credit history of households is extremely important as far as
retail banking is concerned. The Credit Information Bureau (India) Limited (CIBIL),
incorporated in 2000, aims at fulfilling the need of credit granting institutions for
comprehensive credit information by collecting, collating and disseminating credit
information pertaining to both commercial and consumer borrowers.
3.2 WHOLESALE BANKING AND INTERNATIONAL BANKING
3.2.1 What is Wholesale Banking?'
Wholesale Banking refers to doing banking business with industrial and business entities -
mostly corporates and trading houses, including multinationals, domestic business houses and
prime public sector companies. Banks in India have been doing this type of business
traditionally and this segment , of business is also called Corporate Banking/Commercial
Banking. With competition open to even multinational banks, in servicing this segment of
customers, banks are vying with each other in providing a wide array of commercial,
transactional and electronic banking products. Banks achieve this through innovative product
development and a well-integrated approach to relationship management. Every bank
promises to provide superior product delivery, industry benchmark service levels and strong
customer orientation. The product offerings are suitably structured taking into account a
client's risk profile and specific needs.
3.2.2 Products
The products offered can be classified into four major groups, viz., Fund Based Services,
Non-Fund Based Services, Value-Added Services and Internet Banking Services. To
understand this better, a bouquet of products offered by one of the leading private sector
banks is mentioned below.
1. Fund-based Services
a. Term Lending
b. short Term Finance
c. Working Capital finance
d. Bill Discounting
e. Structured Finance
f. Export Credit
2. Non-fund-based Services
a) Bank Guarantees b) Letter of Credit
c) Collection of Bills and Documents
3. Value-added Services
a) Cash Management Services
c) Vendor Financing
e) Corporate Salary Accounts
g) Forex Desk
i) Derivatives Desk
k) Tax Collection
b) Channel Financing
d) Real Time Gross Settlement
f) Syndication Services
h) Money Market Desk
) Employees Trusts
I) Bankers to Right/Public Issue
4. Internet Banking Services
a) Payment Gateway Services
c) Supply Chain Management
b) corporate Internet banking
d) Supply chain partners
All the banks have exclusive product structured to meet the requirements of the Government
Sector. Banks have products to suit other banks in areas like Clearing sub-membership,
DD/cheques payable at par, RTGS - Sub-membership, Cheque Collection, Funds Transfer,
ATM tie-ups, etc. They also cater to the Financial Institutions by offering products like Cash
Management Services and to Mutual Funds by offering products in the areas of Collection
Services, Payment Services, Custodial Services and Funds Transfer. Banks also cater to the
requirements of Stock Brokers like Clearing Settlement Bankers on Equity and Derivatives
Segment, Professional Clearing Member of NSE Derivatives, Bank Guarantees etc.
3.3 INTERNATIONAL BANKING ,
3.3.1 Introduction
Every country manufactures certain goods and services beyond its requirements and they
need to sell (export) this surplus production to other countries. Similarly, no country is self-
reliant with regard to all its requirements and hence it needs to buy (import) certain goods and
services from other countries in order to bridge the demand and supply in its economy.
Further, in a liberalised free trade economy, the government and people of one country may
invest capital and labour in another country and in turn may earn income in the form of
profits, dividends, interest, royalty, etc. The foreign exchange market is the place where each
country/people can pay for their requirements and receive their entitlements in their own
home currency. Banks are amongst the active members of the foreign exchange market and
they provide certain types of services to their customers called International banking services.
Banking services catering to cross-border transactions is called International Banking. Banks
have been traditionally offering various services to the international business people. These
services can be broadly grouped into the following.
3.3.2 Needs of Exporters
1. Export Packing Credit: Banks provide preshipment finance in the form of Export Packing
Credit (EPC) both in rupees as well as in foreign currencies to assist the exporters for
manufacturing or packing the goods for export from India.
2. Export Bill Negotiation: Banks negotiate export bills drawn under Letter of Credit (LC), if
the documents are found to be strictly in terms with the LC conditions and payment of the
bills to the exporter is made even before the bills are realised from the importers.
3. Export Bill Purchase and Discounting: Even when the exports are not covered under Letter
of Credit, banks sanction credit limits and pay the value of the invoice, immediately on
shipment to the exporter at a discount. The export documents are presented and the proceeds
will be credited to the advance account on realisation.
4. Export Bill Collection Sennces: The export documents are sent in collection by the
exporter through his banker for payment by the overseas buyer on their presentation. Such
payments received against the delivery of documents by the buyer's bank are remitted to the
collecting bank and proceeds credited to his account after deducting commission and other
charges, if any.
5. Bank Guarantees: Banks also issue Guarantees in foreign currency on behalf of exporters
for approved purposes as defined under FEMA, subject to availability of credit limits or
against 100 per cent cash margin.
6. Rupee Advance against Export Bills: If an exporter expects the currency of his invoicing to
appreciate further and does not want to surrender the export value of forex, before the due
date, banks offer rupee advance against export bills up to the due date of the receivables,
subject to limit availability and RBI rules.
7. Export LC Advising: With a correspondent banking relationship with the leading banks
across the world, Letter of Credit is advised through Banks.
8. Export LC Confirmation: When the exporter does not have confidence in the credit
standing of an LC opening bank or if the political climate or credit risk of the buyer's country
is not satisfactory, banks offer LC confirmation services.
9. Suppliers Credit: This facility enables Indian exporters to extend term credit to importers
(overseas) of eligible goods at the post-shipment stage.
3.3.3 Requirements of Importers
1. Import Collection Bill *Services: Documentary Collections are a common and flexible
method of payment for goods purchased from abroad. Although relatively simple in principle,
they require careful and accurate attention to bills of exchange, stamping requirements on bill
of exchange, bills of lading and other documents. Banks handle the Import collection
documents meticulously and help the importers to remit the import value.
2. Direct Import Bills: FEMA allows importers to receive import documents directly from the
overseas supplier subject to certain conditions and banks help importers to settle payments
against the direct imports.
3. Advance Payment towards Imports: Whenever any advance payment to an overseas
supplier is required to be made, banks provide advisory services and also assist in faster
remittance to the suppliers.
4. Import Letters of Credit: Banks issue Import Letters of Credit on behalf of importers.
5. Arranging for Buyer's and Supplier's Credit: Banks offer a wide range of offshore
financing options to importers and take care of their working capital requirements. Banks also
arrange for financing import requirements of importers by way of Suppliers' credit and
Buyers' credit.
6. Bank Guarantees: Banks issue Bank Guarantees in foreign currency on behalf of Importers
for all approved purposes as defined under FEMA, against 100 percent cash margin or under
regular limits.
3.3.4 Remittance Services
1. EEFC Account Services: Banks provide facilities to maintain an Exchange Earners Foreign
Currency a/c (EEFC a/c) in all permitted currencies.
2. Receipt of Foreign Inward Remittances Services: Banks receive from abroad and credit
them to the Indian beneficiaries accounts.
3. Payment Services to Abroad (Outward Remittances): Banks as Authorised Dealers in
Foreign Exchange provide remittance facilities in foreign currency to any country for any
permitted purpose up to the limits permitted by RBI.
3.4 UNIVERSAL BANKING
Universal banking means offering all types of financial products like banking, insurance,
mutual funds, capital market related products including share broking, commodity broking,
investment type products like sale of gold/bullion, government/corporate bonds, providing
advisory services and Merchant Banking Activities, etc., - all at one place. The banking
products would include all types of deposit (liability) products and also loan (asset) products
like short-, medium- and long-term loans (project finance). The insurance products would
cover both life and non-life insurance products including health insurance products. In other
words, universal banking refers to a Super Financial Hub for marketing of all the financial
products sold by the private / public/ government bodies under one roof. The main advantage
of universal banking lies in the ability of banks to cross sell their products to a vast clientele
of customers and thereby earn both fee based and a non-fee based income. The customer is
equally benefited as it saves for him/her a lot of time and travel and helps him/her in getting
speedy delivery of the products at one place.
3.4.1 Progress of Universal Banking in India
In the Indian Banking scenario, the first major step towards universal banking started in the
year 2000 with the Government of India, notifying changes in the Banking Regulation Act
allowing banks to venture into the insurance business, either with risk participation or without
risk participation as corporate distribution agents of insurance companies. Further with the
opening up of the insurance sector to private investments, most of the banks have either
started their own insurance companies or entered into a strategic alliance with the insurance
companies under the name of bancassurance for distribution of insurance products across
their wide network of delivery channels. With more and more liberalisation of the economy,
mutual funds have also tied-up with commercial banks to market their products and today
banks are selling the products of different mutual funds under suitable tie-up arrangements.
Another step towards universal banking was the merger of ICICI with ICICI Bank and the
merger of *IDBI with *IDBI Bank and the resultant entity renamed as *IDBI Ltd. continuing
as a commercial scheduled bank. Thus, the two mighty development finance institutions were
merged into commercial banks and many commercial banks have started funding
infrastructure projects. With the refinance institutions like SIDBI and NABARD also jumping
into direct financing, many of the banks have tied-up with these institutions for joint appraisal
and business sharing under the name of co-financing. With more and more freedom being
given to banks and RBI gradually turning into a pure supervisor of banks, the distinction
between the development finance institutions and commercial banks has greatly disappeared.
In 2002, the RBI permitted participation of retail investors in the Government Securities
market and some of the banks are offering customers the opportunity to invest directly in the
debt market also. With prior approval of RBI, most of the banks in India sell imported Gold
Coins of 999.9 purity (investment grade pure gold) by entering into tie-up arrangements with
reputed mints abroad. Banks in India have become directly or through their subsidiaries,
depository participants either with NSDL or CDSL and are offering demat services to
investors. Banks also offer their customers internet-based e-broking services directly or
through tie-up arrangements with SEBI registered brokers to even trade in the capital market.
Some of the banks are also offering portfolio investment schemes to their residential NRI
customers. Thus, banks in India have been progressively marching towards universal
banking.
3.5 AMERICAN DEPOSITORY RECEIPTS (ADRs) AND GLOBAL
DEPOSITORY RECEIPTS (GDRs)
A Depository Receipt (DR) is a type of negotiable (transferable) financial instrument that is
traded on a local stock exchange of a country but represents a security, usually in the form of
equity that is issued by a foreign publicly listed company. The Deposit Receipt, which is a
physical certificate, allows investors to hold shares in equity of other countries. One of the
most common types of Deposit Receipts is the American Depository Receipt (ADR), which
has been offering companies, investors and traders global investment opportunities since the
1920s.
Since then, Deposit Receipts have spread to other parts of the globe in the form of Global
Depository Receipts (GDRs) (the other most common type of Deposit Receipt), European
DRs and International DRs. ADRs are typically traded on a US national stock exchange, such
as the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) or the American Stock Exchange, while GDRs are
commonly listed on European stock exchanges such as the London Stock Exchange. Both
ADRs and GDRs are usually denominated in US dollars, but can also be denominated in
euros.
3.5.1 Deposit Receipt Mechanism
A Deposit Receipt is created when a foreign company wishes to list its already publicly
traded shares or debt securities on a foreign stock exchange. Before it can be listed to a
particular stock exchange, the company in question will have to meet certain requirements
put forth by the exchange. Initial public offerings, however, can also take the form of Deposit
Receipt. Deposit receipts can be traded publicly or over the counter.
Example
A Software company in India has fulfilled the requirements for DR listing and now wants to
list its publicly traded shares on the NYSE in the form of an ADR. Before the software
company's shares are traded freely on the exchange, a US broker, through an international
office or a local brokerage house in India, would purchase the domestic shares from the
Indian market and then have them delivered to the local (Indian) custodian bank of the
depository bank. The depository bank is the American institution that issues the ADRs in
America. In this example, let us take the depository bank as the Bank of New York. Once the
Bank of New York's local custodian bank in India receives the shares, this custodian bank
verifies the delivery of the shares by informing the Bank of New York that the shares can now
be issued in the United States. The Bank of New York then delivers the ADRs to the broker
who initially purchased them. Based on a determined ADR ratio, each ADR may be issued as
representing one or more of the Indian local shares and the price of each ADR would be
stated in US dollars converted from the equivalent Indian price of the shares being held by
the depository bank. The ADRs now represent the local Indian shares held by the depository
and can now be freely traded equity on the NYSE.
After the process whereby the new ADR of the Indian software company is issued, the ADR
can be traded freely among the investors and transferred from the buyer to the seller on the
NYSE, through a procedure known as intra-market trading. All ADR transactions of the
Indian software company will now take place in US dollars and are settled like any other US
transaction on the NYSE. The ADR investor holds privileges like those granted to
shareholders of ordinary shares, such as voting rights and cash dividends. The rights of the
ADR holder are stated on the ADR certificate.
3.5.2 The Benefits of Depository Receipts
The DR functions as a means to increase the global trade, which in turn can help increase not
only volumes on local and foreign markets but also the exchange of information, technology,
regulatory procedures as well as market transparency. Thus, instead of being faced with
impediments to foreign investment, as is often the case in many emerging markets, the DR
investor and company can both benefit from investment abroad. Let us take a closer look at
the benefits.
TABLE 3.1 Benefits of Depository Receipts
 For the Company
A company may opt to issue a DR to obtain greater exposure and raise capital in the world
market. Issuing DRs has the added benefit of increasing the share's liquidity while boosting
the company's prestige in its local market (the company is traded internationally). Depository
receipts encourage an international shareholder base and provide expatriates living abroad
with an easier opportunity to invest in their home countries. Moreover, in many countries,
especially those with emerging markets, obstacles often prevent foreign investors from
entering the local market. By issuing a DR, a company can still encourage investment from
abroad without having to worry about barriers to entry that a foreign investor might face.
 For the Investor
Buying into a DR immediately turns an investors' portfolio into a global one. Investors gain
the benefits of diversification, while trading in their own market under familiar settlement
and clearance conditions. More importantly, DR investors will be able to reap the benefits of
these usually higher risk, higher return equities, without having to endure the added risks of
going directly into foreign markets, which may pose lack of transparency or instability
resulting from changing regulatory procedures. It is important to remember that an investor
will still bear some foreign exchange risk, stemming from uncertainties in emerging
economies and societies. On the other hand, the investor can also benefit from competitive
rates the US dollar and euro have with respect to most foreign currencies.
Thus, an issue of ADR/GDR by a company in an overseas market gives people the
opportunity to add the benefits of foreign investment while bypassing the unnecessary risks
of investing outside their own borders, by adding these securities to their portfolio. As with
any security, however, investing in ADRs requires an understanding of why they are used and
how they are issued and traded.
3.6 PARTICIPATORY NOTES
Foreigners or non-residents (i.e. people living outside India other than Non-Resident Indians
and Persons of Indian Origin) are not allowed to invest directly in the Indian stock market.
Their involvement in the Indian capital market has to be carried out through a foreign
institution, which in turn is required to register itself with Securities and Exchange Board of
India (SEBI) as a foreign institutional investor (FII).
Participatory notes are like contract notes. These are issued by Foreign Institutional Investors
(FIIs) to entities that want to invest in the Indian stock market but do not want to register
themselves with the SEBI. FIIs registered with the SEBI and their sub-accounts can issue,
deal or hold Participatory Notes.
The underlying security against these notes would be listed or proposed to be listed securities
on any Indian stock exchange. FIIs issue these notes to investors abroad with details of scrips
that can be bought and expected returns over specific periods of time. If the client agrees,
they deposit the funds with the overseas branch of the FII. Then, the Indian arm of the FII
proceeds with the transaction, buying the scrips in the Indian market and settling it on its own
account. The details of the ultimate investor are not revealed at all in the Indian market or to
the SEBI. In respect of participatory notes, the nature of the beneficial ownership or the
identity of the investor will not be known, unlike in the case of FIIs registered with a
financial regulator.
On recommendation by the Lahiri Committee, in 2004, SEBI passed a regulation that
derivative instruments like Participatory Notes against underlying Indian securities can be
issued only to regulated entities and further transfers, if any, can also be to other regulated
entities only. FIIs issuing such derivative instruments are therefore required to exercise due
diligence and maintain complete details of investors, based strictly on 'know your client'
principles. In the words of SEBI, 'A Foreign Institutional Investor or sub-account may issue,
deal in or hold, offshore derivative instruments such as Participatory Notes, Equity Linked
Notes or any other similar instruments against underlying securities, listed or proposed to be
listed on any stock exchange in India, only in favour of those entities which are regulated by
any relevant regulatory authority in the countries of their incorporation or establishment,
subject to compliance of "know your client" requirement'.
FIIs are not allowed to issue Participatory Notes to Indian nationals, persons of Indian origin
or overseas corporate bodies (which are majority owned or controlled by NRIs). This is done
to ensure that the Participatory Note route is not used for money laundering purposes.
FIIs are required to report to the SEBI on a monthly basis if they issue, renew, cancel, or
redeem Participatory Notes. The SEBI also seeks some quarterly reports about investing in
Participatory Notes.
3.7 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS
1. The loan values (amount of loan) under retail lending normally range between
True: a) Rs. 20,000 to Rs. 100 lakh
(b) Rs. 100 lakh to Rs. 10 crore (c) More than Rs. 10 crore (d) None.
2. The Retail loans given by commercial banks are generally for duration of
True: a) five to seven years with housing loans granted for a longer duration of 15-20 years
(b)less than 5 years only.
(c)less than 1 year only.
(d) none.
3. The experience of banks in India in recent years under retail lending has shown that the
following loans had the least level of impairment (defaults).
True: a) home loans portfolio
(b) consumer loans portfolio (c) vehicle loans portfolio (d) none
4. Wholesale banking refers to doing banking business with
(a) individuals
True: (b)industrial and business entities - including government and public sector companies.
(c) only companies registered under the Companies Act.
(d)large borrowers irrespective of their category
5. A Depository Receipt (DR) is a type of
True: a) negotiable (transferable) financial instrument that is traded on a local stock exchange
of a country but represents a security, usually in the form of equity that is issued by a foreign
publicly listed company.
(b) negotiable (transferable) financial instrument that is traded on a stock exchange of a
foreign country but represents a security, usually in the form of equity that is issued by a
foreign publicly listed company.
(c) negotiable (transferable) financial instrument that is traded on a local stock exchange
of a country but represents a security, usually in the form of equity that is issued by a local
publicly listed company.
(d) Receipt given by a depository participant of a depository.
6. 'Overseas Depository Bank' means
True: a) a bank authorised by the issuing company to issue Global Depository receipts against
issue of Foreign Currency Convertible Bonds or ordinary shares of the issuing company;
(b) a bank authorised by the government to issue Global Depository receipts against issue
of Foreign Currency Convertible Bonds or ordinary shares of the issuing company;
(c) a bank authorised by the issuing company to issue Global Depository Receipts against
receipt of foreign currency;
(d) a bank where deposits in foreign currencies can be made.
7. Participatory notes are like contract notes issued by
True: a) Foreign Institutional Investors (FIIs) to entities that want to invest in the Indian stock
market but do not want to register themselves with the SEBI.
(b) Commercial banks to their investors.
(c) Government of India to banks
(d) None.
8. On recommendation from Lahiri Committee, in 2004, SEBI passed a regulation that
derivative, instruments like Participatory Notes against underlying Indian securities can be
issued.
True: a) Only to regulated entities and further transfers, if any, can also be to other regulated
entities only.
(b) Only to foreign banks
(c) Only to FIIs registered with SEBI
(d) None.
3.8 ANSWERS TO 'CHECK YOUR PROGRESS'
(a), 2. (a), 3. (a), 4. (b), 5. (a), 6. (a), 7. (a), 8. (a).
3.9 KEYWORDS
Retail Banking, Wholesale Banking, International Banking, Depository Receipts.
Participatory notes.
Unit 4 ROLE AND FUNCTIONS OF CAPITAL MARKET,
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE BOARD OF INDIA (SEBI)
STRUCTURE
4.0 Objectives
4.1 Capital Markets
4.1.1 Primary Market
4.1.2 Secondary Market
4.1.3 Stock Exchanges in India
. 4.1.4 Demutualisation of Stock Exchanges
4.1.5 Stock Brokers
4.1.6 Financial Products/Instruments Dealt with in the Secondary Market
4.1.7 Regulatory Requirements Specified by SEBI for Corporate
Debt Securities
4.1.8 Commonly Used Terms in the Capital Market
4.1.9 Types of Capital Issues in the Primary Market
4.1.10 Eligibility Norms for Making Capital Issues
4.1.11 Intermediaries in an Issue in the Primary Market
4.2 The Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI)
4.2.1 Functions of the Board
4.2.2 Power to Investigate
4.2.3 Cease and Desist Proceedings
4.3 Registration of Stock Brokers, Sub-brokers, Share Transfer Agents, etc.
4.4 Qualified Institutional Buyers (QIBs)
4.5 Check Your Progress
4.6 Answers to 'Check Your Progress'
4.7 Keywords
34
4.0 OBJECTIVES
On reading this unit, the reader will be able to understand:
the structure of capital markets in India, and
the role and functions of Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI).
4.1 CAPITAL MARKETS Introduction
For starting any business, an entrepreneur needs investment in the form of capital. Depending
on the size of the project, the requirement of capital will vary. In most cases, the entrepreneur
may not be able to bring in the required capital from his own money. The entrepreneur may
have to borrow the money from banks/financial institutions, friends or relatives. Borrowing
has a cost in the form of 'interest' and this may prove to be a severe burden on the profitability
of the business, particularly, in case of projects with long gestation (developments) periods.
At the same time, interest cost has some tax advantage. The promoters will have to decide the
financing aspect of the project, taking into consideration the various costs involved. Since the
banks/financial institutions may demand a security for their loan in the form of collaterals,
the promoters may choose to raise a major part of their requirement of capital money from
the public by offering to the later, certain instruments like equity shares, debentures, bonds,
and so on. In order to raise money from the public, SEBI has prescribed certain rules and
regulations and by complying with the same, the promoters can raise their financial
requirement in a market known as the capital market.
Capital market is a market for long-term debt and equity shares. In this market, capital funds
comprising both equity and debt are issued and traded. This also includes private placement
sources of debt and equity as well as organised markets like stock exchanges. Capital market
can be further divided into the primary and secondary markets.
4.1.1Primary Market
In the primary market, securities (shares/bonds/debentures) are offered to the public for
subscription, for the purpose of raising capital or fund. The issue of securities, shares or
bonds in the primary market is subject to the fulfilment of a number of pre-issue guidelines
by SEBI and compliance to various provisions of the Company Act. The primary market is
classified into 'public issue' market and 'private placement' market. There are a number of
intermediaries in the primary market such as merchant banker, issue manager, lead arranger,
etc.
Banks participate in the market for subscription to issues as also bring banker to the Issue,
arrange, handwritten, etc.
4.1.2Secondary Market
Secondary market refers to a market where securities are traded after being initially offered to
the public in the primary market and/or listed on the Stock Exchange. Secondary market
comprises equity markets and debt markets. Secondary market is the trading avenue in which
already existing/preissued securities are traded amongst investors. Secondary market could be
either an auction or a dealer market. While stock exchange is the part of an auction market,
Over the Counter (OTC) market is a part of the dealer market.
For the general investors, the secondary market provides an efficient platform for trading of
securities and price discovery. For the managers of the company, secondary (equity) markets
serve as a monitoring and control conduit (means) — by facilitating value enhancing control
activities, enabling implementation of incentive-based management contracts and aggregating
information (via price discovery) that guides management decisions. Banks facilitate
secondary market transactions by opening direct trading and demat accounts to individuals
and companies. Banks also extend credit against securities. They may also act as clearing
house banks.
4.1.3Stock Exchanges in India
There are 22 recognised stock exchanges in India. In terms of legal structure, the stock
exchanges in India could be segregated into two broad groups - nineteen stock exchanges
which were set up as companies, either limited by guarantees or by shares, and the 3 stock
exchanges which were Associations of Persons (AOPs), viz. Bombay Stock Exchange (BSE),
Ahmedabad Stock Exchange (ASE) and Madhya Pradesh Stock Exchange (MPSE). The
nineteen stock exchanges which have been functioning as companies include: the Stock
Exchanges of Bangalore, Bhubaneswar, Calcutta, Cochin, Coimbatore, Delhi, Guwahati,
Hyderabad, Interconnected SE, Jaipur, Ludhiana, Madras, Magadh, Pune, Saurashtra-Kutch,
Uttar Pradesh, Vadodara, National Stock Exchange (NSE) and Over the Counter Exchange of
India (OTCEI). Apart from NSE, all stock exchanges, whether established as corporate
bodies or as AOPs, were non-profit making organisations.
To improve the efficiency of the exchanges, it is necessary to corporatise them.
Corporatisation is the process of converting the organisational structure of the stock exchange
from a non-corporate to a corporate structure. Traditionally, some of the stock exchanges in
India were established as AOPs, e.g. BSE, ASE and MPSE. Corporatisation of such
exchanges is the process of converting them into incorporated companies.
4.1.4Demutualisation of Stock Exchanges
Demutualisation refers to the transition process of an exchange from a 'mutually owned'
association to a 'shareholders-owned' company. In other words, transforming the legal
structure of an exchange from a mutual form to a business corporation form is referred to as
demutualisation. The above in effect means that after demutualisation the ownership, the
management, and the trading rights at the exchange are segregated from one another.
In a mutual exchange, the three functions of ownership, management and trading are
intertwined into a single group. Here, the broker members of the exchange are both the
owners and the traders on the exchange and they further manage the exchange as well. A
demutualised exchange, on the other hand, has all these three functions clearly segregated,
i.e. the ownership, management and trading are in separate hands.
The BSE, NSE and OTCEI are not only corporatised but also demutualised with the
segregation of ownership and trading rights of members.
The NSE was started in 1992 by banks and financial institutions including Industrial
Financial Corporation of India (IFCI), IL&FS, Industrial Credit and Investment Corporation
of India (ICICI), Punjab National Bank (PNB) and General Insurance Corporation. Foreign
institutional investors can now invest up to 49 per cent in stock exchanges in India. There is,
however, a limit of 5 per cent, beyond which no single investor either directly or indirectly,
can hold shares in an Indian stock exchange. NSE, already has an enabling provision
allowing a Foreign Institutional Investment (FII) up to 26 per cent and a Foreign Direct
Investment (FDI) limit of 23 per cent of its paid-up capital. The paid-up capital of NSE is at
present Rs. 45 crore. In January 2007, four select foreign investors, viz., the New York Stock
Exchange Group, Goldman Sachs, General Atlantic and Japan's Softbank Asia Infrastructure
Fund have picked up 5 per cent each, of the capital of NSE for a consideration of Rs. 2250-
2500 crore.
4.1.5 Stock Brokers
A broker is a member of a recognized stock exchange, who is permitted to do trading on the
screen-based trading system of different stock exchanges. He is enrolled as a member with
the concerned exchange and is registered with SEBI.
A sub-broker is affiliated to a member of a recognised stock exchange and is a person who is
registered with SEBI.
4.1.6 Financial Products/Instruments Dealt with in the Secondary Market
The following are the main financial products/instruments dealt in the secondary market:
Equity: Equity is the ownership interest in a company of holders of its common and preferred
stocks. The various kinds of equity shares are as follows:
Equity Shares: An equity share is commonly referred to as an ordinary share. It represents the
form of fractional ownership in which a shareholder, as a fractional owner, undertakes the
entrepreneurial risk associated with a business venture. The holders of equity shares are
members of the company and have voting rights. A company may issue such shares with
differential rights for voting, payment of dividend, etc.
Rights Issue/Rights Shares: This refers to the issue of new securities to the existing
shareholders, at a ratio to those shares already held.Bonus Shares: These shares are issued by
the companies to their shareholders free of cost by capitalisation of accumulated reserves
from the profits earned in the earlier years or out of the share premium account.
Preferred Stock/Preference Shares: These shares do not offer voting rights. Owners of these
shares are entitled to a fixed dividend or a dividend calculated at a fixed rate to be paid
regularly before any dividend can be paid in respect of equity share. These shareholders also
enjoy priority over the equity shareholders in the payment of surplus. In the event of
liquidation, their claims rank below the claims of the company's creditors,
bondholders/debenture holders, etc., but above the claims of the equity shareholders.
Cumulative Preference Shares: This is a type of preference share on which dividend
accumulates if it remains unpaid. All arrears of preference dividend have to be paid out
before paying dividend on equity shares.
Cumulative Convertible Preference Shares: This is a type of preference share where the
dividend payable on the same accumulates, if not paid. After a specified date, these shares
will be converted into equity capital of the company.
Participating Preference Share: This refers to the right of certain preference shareholders to
participate in profits, after a specified fixed dividend contracted for is paid. Participation right
is linked with the quantum of dividend paid on the equity shares over and above a particular
specified level.
Security Receipts: Security receipts mean receipts or other securities, issued by a
securitisation company or a reconstruction company to any qualified institutional buyer
pursuant to a scheme, evidencing the purchase or acquisition by the holder thereof, of an
undivided right, title or interest in the financial assets involved in securitisation.
Government Securities (G-Secs): These are sovereign (credit risk free) coupon-bearing
instruments which are issued by the Reserve Bank of India on behalf of the Government of
India, in lieu of the Central Government's market borrowing programme. These securities
have a fixed coupon that is paid on specific dates on a half-yearly basis. These securities are
available in a wide range of maturity dates, from short-dated (less than one year) to long-
dated (up to thirty years). The Government issues zero coupon bonds/securities too.
Debentures: Debentures are bonds issued by a company bearing a fixed rate of interest
usually payable half-yearly, on specific dates and the principal amount repayable on a
particular date on redemption of
37
the debentures. Debentures are normally secured/charged against the asset of the company in
favour of the debenture holder.
Bond: A bond is a negotiable certificate evidencing indebtedness. It is normally unsecured. A
Bond (debt security) security is generally issued by a company, municipality or a government
agency. A bond investor lends money to the issuer and in exchange, the issuer promises to
repay the loan amount on a specified maturity date. The issuer usually pays the bond holder
periodic interest payments over the life of the loan. The various types of bonds are as follows:
1. Coupon Bonds: These are normal bonds on which the issuer pays the investor/holder
interest at the
predetermined rate (known as coupon) at agreed intervals, normally twice a year. The
maturity of the bond is known by the period for which it is issued. In the secondary market,
since the interest
income is fixed to the face value, these bonds are traded at yield to maturity (YTM) based on
market rates of interest.
2. Zero Coupon Bond: A bond issued at a discount and repaid at a face value is called a
Zero Coupon Bond. No periodic interest is paid in this case. The difference between the issue
price and redemption price represents the return to the holder. The buyer of these bonds
receives only one payment, at the maturity of the bond.
3. Convertible Bond: A bond giving the investor the option to convert the bond into
equity at a fixed conversion price is referred to as a Convertible Bond.
Commercial Paper: Commercial papers are borrowings of a company from the market. They
take the shape of short-term promises to repay fixed amounts. They are placed on the market
either directly or through specialised intermediaries. Commercial papers are usually issued by
companies with a high credit standing in the form of promissory notes, redeemable at par, to
the holder on maturity and, therefore, does not require any guarantee. Commercial papers are
money market instruments issued normally for a tenure of ninety days.
Treasury Bills: These are short-term (up to ninety-one days) bearer discount security, issued
by the Government (through the Reserve Bank of India) as a means of meeting its cash
requirements.
4.1.7 Regulatory Requirements Specified by SEBI for Corporate Debt Securities
All securities issued by a public issue must be listed in one or more stock exchanges. The
issue of debt securities having a maturity period of more than 365 days by companies
including listed companies (i.e. which have any of their securities, either as equity or debt,
offered through an offer document and listed on a recognised stock exchange and also
includes public sector undertakings whose securities are listed on a recognised stock
exchange) on a private placement basis must comply with the conditions prescribed by SEBI
from time to time for getting them listed on the stock exchanges. Further, unlisted
companies/statutory corporations/other entities, if they so desire, may get their privately
placed debt securities listed on the stock exchanges by complying with the relevant
conditions. The debt securities shall carry a credit rating from a credit rating agency
registered with SEBI. The debt securities shall be issued and traded in the demat form.
4.1.8 Commonly Used Terms in the Capital Market
Securities Transaction Tax (STT): Securities Transaction Tax (STT) is a tax being levied on
all transactions done on the stock exchanges at rates prescribed by the Central Government
from time to time. Pursuant to the enactment of the Finance (No. 2) Act, 2004, the
Government of India notified the Securities Transaction Tax Rules, 2004 and STT came into
effect from 1 October, 2004.
Rolling Settlement: In a Rolling Settlement, trades executed during the day are settled, based
on the nett obligations for the day. Presently, the trades pertaining to the rolling settlement are
settled on a T+2 day basis, where T stands for the trade day. Trades executed on a Monday,
hence, are typically settled
38
on Wednesday (considering 2 working days from the trade day). The funds and securities
pay-in and pay-out are carried out on T+2 day.
Pay-in Day and Pay-out Day: Pay-in day is the day when the brokers make payments or
delivery of securities to the exchange. Pay-out day is the day when the exchange makes
payment or delivery of securities to the broker. Settlement cycle is on a T+2 rolling
settlement basis w.e.f. 1 April, 2003. The exchanges have to ensure that the pay-out of funds
and securities to the clients is done by the broker within twenty-four hours of the pay-out.
The exchanges will have to issue a press release immediately after the pay-out.
Auction: It is the main function of the exchange that both legs of a transaction namely the
cash and security are available for settlement and there are no bad deliveries. In case of
failure of delivery by a member, the exchange purchases the requisite quantity in the auction
market and gives them to the buying or trading member. The shortages are met through an
auction process and the difference in price indicated in the contract note and price received
through the auction is paid by the member to the exchange, which is then liable to be
recovered from the client.
Securities Lending Scheme: Securities Lending and Borrowing is a scheme which enables
lending of idle securities by the investors to the clearing corporation and earning a return
through the same. For securities borrowing and lending system, clearing corporations of the
stock exchange would be the nodal agency and be registered as the 'Approved Intermediaries'
(AIs). The clearing corporation can borrow, on behalf of the members, securities for the
purpose of meeting shortfalls. The defaulting selling broker may make the delivery within the
period specified by the clearing corporation. In the event of the defaulted selling broker
failing to make the delivery within the specified period, the clearing corporation has to buy
the securities from the open market and return the same to the lender within seven trading
days. In case of an inability to purchase the securities from the market, the transaction shall
be closed out.
4.1.9 Types of Capital Issues in the Primary Market
In the primary market, issues can be classified as a public, rights or preferential issues (also
known as private placements). While public and rights issues involve a detailed procedure,
private placements or preferential issues are relatively simpler.
Public issues can be further classified into Initial Public Offerings (IPO) and Further Public
Offerings (FPOs). In a public offering, the issuer makes an offer for the new investors to enter
its shareholding family. The issuer company makes detailed disclosures as per the Disclosure
and Investor Protection (DIP) guidelines in its offer document and offers it for subscription.
An IPO is the offering that is made when an unlisted company makes either a fresh issue of
securities or an offer for sale of its existing securities or both for the first time to the public.
This paves way for listing and trading of the issuer's securities.
An FPO is made when an already listed company makes either a fresh issue of securities to
the public or an offer for sale to the public, through an offer document. An offer for sale in
such a scenario is allowed only if it is made to satisfy listing or continuous listing obligations.
Rights Issue (RI) is when a listed company proposes to issue fresh securities to its existing
shareholders as on a recorded date. The rights are normally offered in a particular ratio to the
number of securities held prior to the issue. This route is best suited for companies who
would like to raise capital without diluting the stake of its existing shareholders, unless they
do not intend to subscribe to their entitlements.
A private placement is an issue of shares or of convertible securities by a company to a select
group of persons under Section 81 of the Companies Act, 1956, which is neither a rights issue
nor a public issue. This is a faster way for a company to raise equity capital.
39
A Qualified Institutional Placement (QIP) is a private placement of equity shares or
securitiesconvertible into equity shares by a listed company to Qualified institutional buyers
(QIB)only,in terms of provisions of chapter XIIIA of SEBI (DIP) guidelines.
4.1.10 Eligibility Norms for Making Capital Issues
SEBI has laid down eligibility norms for entities accessing the primary market through public
issues. There are no eligibility norms for a listed company that is making a rights issue as it is
an offer made to the existing shareholders who are expected to know their company. There
are also no eligibility norms for a listed company making a preferential issue. However for a
QIP, only those companies whose shares are listed in NSE or BSE and those who are having a
minimum public float as required in terms of the listing agreement, are eligible.
Any company making a public issue or a listed company making a rights issue of a value of
more than Rs. 50 lakh is required to file a draft offer document with SEBI for its
observations. The validity period of SEBFs observation letter is only three months, i.e. the
company has to open its issue within a period of three months. There is no requirement of
filing any offer document/notice to SEBI in the case of preferential allotment and QIP. In
QIP, the merchant banker handling the issue has to file a copy of the placement document
with SEBI post-allotment, for record purposes.
The merchant banks are the specialised intermediaries who are required to display due
diligence and ensure that all the requirements of DIP are complied with, while submitting the
draft offer document to SEBI. Any non-compliance on their part attracts penal action from
SEBI, in terms of SEBI (Merchant Bankers) Regulations. The draft offer document filed by
the merchant banker is also placed on the website for public comments. Officials of SEBI, at
various levels, examine the compliance with DIP guidelines and ensure that all necessary
material information is disclosed in the draft offer documents.
Offer Document means prospectus in case of a public issue, or offer for sale and Letter of
Offer in case of a rights issue which are filed with Registrar of Companies (ROC) and stock
exchanges. An offer document covers all the relevant information to help an investor to make
his/her investment decision.
A Draft Offer Document means the offer document in a draft stage. The draft offer documents
are filed with SEBI, at least twenty-one days prior to the filing of the offer document with
ROC/SEs. SEBI may specify changes, if any, in the draft offer document and the issuer or the
lead merchant banker (LM) shall carry out such changes in the draft offer document before
filing the offer document with ROC/ SEs. The draft offer document will be available on the
SEBI website for public comments for a period of twenty-one days from the filing of the draft
offer document with SEBI.
Red Herring Prospectus (RHP) is a prospectus which does not have details of either price of
number of shares being offered or the amount of issue. This means that in case the price is not
disclosed, the number of shares and the upper and lower price bands are disclosed. On the
other hand, an issuer can state the issue size, and the number of shares are determined later.
An RHP for an FPO can be filed with the ROC without the price band. In such a case, the
floor price or the price band will be notified by way of an advertisement one day prior to the
opening of the issue. In the case of book-built issues, it is a process of price discovery and the
price cannot be determined until the bidding process is completed. Such details are thus not
shown in the RHP filed with ROC in terms of the provisions of the Companies Act. Only on
completion of the bidding process, the details of the final price are included in the offer
document. The offer document filed thereafter with ROC is called a prospectus.
Pricing of the Issue
Indian primary market ushered in an era of free pricing in 1992. Following this, the
guidelines have provided that the issuer, in consultation with the merchant banker shall
decide the price. There is no price formula stipulated by SEBI. SEBI does not play any role in
the price fixation. The company and
merchant banker are however required to give full disclosures of the parameters which they
had considered while deciding the issue price. There are two types of issues, one where
company and LM fix a price (called fixed price) and other, where the company and LM
stipulate a floor price or a price
band and leave it to market forces to determine the final price (price discovery through book
building process).
An issuer company is allowed to freely price the issue. The basis of issue price is disclosed in
the offer document where the issuer discloses in detail about the qualitative and quantitative
factors justifying the issue price. The issuer company can mention a price band of 20 per cent
(cap in the price band should not be more than 20 per cent of the floor price) in the draft offer
documents filed with SEBI and actual price can be determined at a later date before filing of
the final offer document with SEBI/ROCs. Book Building means a process undertaken, by
which a demand for the securities proposed to be issued by a corporate body is elicited and
built-up and the price for the securities is assessed on the basis of the bids obtained for the
quantum of securities offered for subscription by the issuer. This method provides an
opportunity to the market to discover the price for securities.
In a book built issue allocation, Retail Individual Investors (RIIs), Non-Institutional Investors
(Nils) and QIBs are in the ratio of 35:15:50 respectively. In case the book built issues are
made pursuant to the requirement of mandatory allocation of 60 per cent to QIBs in terms of
Rule 19(2)(b) of SCRR, the respective figures are 30 per cent for RIIs and 10 per cent for
Nils. Retail Individual Investor means an investor who apples or bids for securities of or for a
value not more than Rs. 1,00,000.
4.1.11 Intermediaries in an ISSUE in the Primary Market.
Merchant bankers to the issue or Book Running Lead Managers (BRLM), syndicate
members, registrars to the issue, bankers to the issue, auditors of the company, underwriters
to the issue, solicitors, etc., are the intermediaries to an issue in the primary market.
Book Running Lead Managers (BRLM): A merchant banker possessing a valid SEBI
registration in accordance with the SEBI (Merchant Bankers) Regulations, 1992 is eligible to
act as a BRLM to an issue.
Safety Net: Any safety net scheme or buy-back arrangements of the shares proposed in any
public issue shall be finalised by an issuer company with the lead merchant banker in
advance and disclosed in the prospectus. Such a buy-back or safety net arrangement shall be
made available only to original resident individual allottees limited to a maximum of 1000
shares per allottee and the offer is kept open for a period of six months from the last date of
dispatch of securities.
Cut Off Price: In a book-building issue, the issuer is required to indicate either the price band
or a floor price in the RHP. The actual discovered issue price can be any price in the price
band or any price above the floor price. This issue price is called the Cut Off Price. This is
decided by the issuer and LM after considering the 'book and investors' appetite for the stock.
SEBI (DIP) guidelines permit only retail individual investors to have an option of applying at
the cut off price.
4.2 THE SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE BOARD OF INDIA (SEBI) The Government of
India enacted the SEBI Act, 1992, on 4 April 1992 to provide for the establishment of a
board, called the Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) to protect the interests of
investors in securities and to promote the development of and to regulate, the securities
market and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto (Prior to the formation of
SEBI, some of the control functions were carried on by the controller of Capital Issues and
the Company Law Board.).
4.2.1 Functions of the Board
1. Subject to the provisions of this Act, it shall be the duty of the board to protect the
interests of in¬ vestors in securities and to promote the development of and to regulate the
securities market, by:
(a) regulating the business in stock exchanges and any other securities markets;
(b)(i) registering and regulating the working of stock brokers, sub-brokers, share transfer
agents, bankers to an issue, trustees of trust deeds, registrars to an issue, merchant bankers,
underwriters, portfolio managers, investment advisers and such other intermediaries who may
be associated with the securities market in any manner;
(ii) registering and regulating the working of the depositories, participants, custodians of
securities, foreign institutional investors, credit rating agencies.
(c) registering and regulating the working of venture capital funds and collective investment
schemes, including mutual funds;
(d) promoting and regulating self-regulatory organisations;
(e) prohibiting fraudulent and unfair trade practices relating to the securities markets;
(f) promoting investors' education and training of intermediaries of security markets;
(g) prohibiting insider trading in securities;
(h) regulating substantial acquisition of shares and takeover of companies; (i) calling for
information from, undertaking inspection, conducting inquiries and audits of the stock
exchanges, mutual funds, other persons associated with the securities market, intermediaries
and self-regulatory organisations in the securities market;
(j) (i) calling for information and records from any bank or any other authority or board or
corporation established or constituted by or under any Central, State or Provincial Act in
respect of any transaction in securities, which is under investigation or inquiry by the Board;
(ii) performing such functions and exercising such powers under the provisions of the
Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 (42 of 1956), as may be delegated to it by the
Central Government;
(k) levying fees or other charges for carrying out the purposes of this section; (1) conducting
research for the above purposes;
(i) calling fromor furnishing to any such agencies, as may be specified by the board, such
information as may be considered necessary by it for the efficient discharge of its functions;
(m) performing such other functions as may be prescribed.
2. The board may take measures to undertake inspection of any book, or register or other
document
or record of any listed public company or a public company (not being intermediaries), which
intends to get its securities listed on any recognised stock exchange, where the board has
reasonable
grounds to believe that such a company has been indulging in insider trading or fraudulent
and
unfair trade practices relating to the securities market.
3. The board shall have the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of
Civil
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), while trying a suit in respect of the following matters, namely:
(a) the discovery and production of books of account and other documents, at such a
place and
time as may be specified by the board;
(b) summoning and enforcing the attendance of persons and examining them on oath;
(c) inspection of any books, registers and other documents of any person at any place;
(d) inspection of any book or register, or other documents or record of the company;
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents.
4. The board may, by an order, for reasons to be recorded in writing, in the interests of
investors or
the securities market, take any of the following measures, either pending investigation or
inquiry
or on completion of such investigation or inquiry, namely:
42
suspend the trading of any security in a recognised stock exchange;
restrain persons from accessing the securities market and prohibit any person associated
with the securities market to buy, sell or deal in securities;
suspend any office bearer of any stock exchange or self-regulatory organisation from holding
such position;impound and retain the proceeds or securities in respect of any transaction
which is under investigation; attach, after passing of an order on an application made for
approval by the Judicial Magistrate of the first class having jurisdiction, for a period not
exceeding one month, one or more bank
account or accounts of any intermediary or any person associated with the securities market
in any manner involved in violation of any of the provisions of this Act or the rules or the
regulations made thereunder. This provided that only the bank account or accounts or any
transaction entered therein, so far as it relates to the proceeds actually involved in violation of
any of the provisions of this Act, or the rules or the regulations made thereunder shall be
allowed to be attached;
(a) direct any intermediary or any person associated with the securities market in any
manner not
to dispose of or alienate an asset, forming part of any transaction which is under
investigation.
Powers of SEBI to Regulate or Prohibit Issue of Prospectus, Offer Document or
Advertisement Soliciting Money for Issue of Securities: Without prejudice to the provisions
of the Companies Act, 1956, (1 of 1956), SEBI may, for the protection of investors,
(a) specify, by regulations:
(i) the matters relating to issue of capital, transfer of securities and other matters incidental
thereto; and (ii) the manner in which such matters shall be disclosed by the companies;
(b) by general or special orders:
(i) prohibit any company from issuing prospectus, any offer document or advertisement
soliciting
money from the public for the issue of securities;
(ii) specify the conditions subject to which, the prospectus, such offer document or
advertisement, if not prohibited, may be issued.
Without prejudice to the provisions of Section 21 of the Securities Contracts (Regulation)
Act, 1956 (42 of 1956), SEBI may specify the requirements for listing and transfer of
securities and other matters incidental thereto.
4.2.2 Power to Investigate
When SEBI has reasonable ground to believe that:
the transactions in securities are being dealt with in a manner detrimental to the investors or
the
securities market; or
any intermediary or any person associated with the securities market has violated any of the
provisions
of this Act or the rules or the regulations made or directions issued by SEBI thereunder,
it may, at any time by order in writing, direct any person (specified in the order to investigate
the affairs of such intermediary or persons associated with the securities market) to report
thereon to the board, for taking suitable action.
4.2.3 Cease and Desist Proceedings
If SEBI finds, after causing an inquiry to be made, that any person has violated, or is likely to
violate, any provisions of this Act, or any rules or regulations made thereunder, it may pass an
order requiring such person(s) to cease and desist from committing or causing such violation.
43
4.3 REGISTRATION OF STOCK BROKERS, SUB-BROKERS,
SHARE TRANSFER AGENTS, ETC.
1. No stock broker, sub-broker, share transfer agent, banker to an issue, trustee of trust
deed, registrar to an issue, merchant banker, underwriter, portfolio manager, investment
adviser and such other intermediary who may be associated with the securities market shall
buy, sell or deal in securities except under and in accordance with, the conditions of a
certificate of registration obtained from SEBI in accordance with the regulations made under
this Act.
2. No depository, participant, custodian of securities, foreign institutional investor, credit
rating agency or any other intermediary associated with the securities market as the Board
may, by notification in this behalf specify, shall buy or sell or deal in securities except under
and in accordance with the conditions of a certificate of registration obtained from SEBI in
accordance with the regulations made under this Act.
3. No person shall sponsor or cause to be sponsored or carry on or cause to be carried on
any venture capital funds or collective investment schemes including mutual funds, unless he
obtains a f registration from SEBI in accordance with the regulations.
4. Every application for registration shall be in such a manner and on payment of such
fees as may be determined by the regulations.
5. SEBI may, by order, suspend or cancel a certificate of registration in such manner as
may be determined by regulations.
Provided that no order under this sub-section shall be made unless the person concerned has
been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
4.4 QUALIFIED INSTITUTIONAL BUYERS (QIBs)
Qualified Institutional Buyers (QIBs) are those institutional investors who are generally
perceived to possess an expertise and the financial muscle to evaluate and invest in the capital
markets. In terms of Clause 2.2.2B (v) of DIP guidelines, a 'Qualified Institutional Buyer'
shall mean:
(a) public financial institution as defined in section 4A of the Companies Act, 1956;
(b) scheduled commercial banks;
(c) mutual funds;
(d) foreign institutional investor registered with SEBI;
(e) multilateral and bilateral development financial institutions;
(f) venture capital funds registered with SEBI;
(g)foreign venture capital investors registered with SEBI;
(h)State Industrial Development Corporations;
(i) Insurance Companies registered with the Insurance Regulatory and Development
Authority (IRDA); (j) Provident Funds with a minimum corpus of Rs. 25 crore; (k) Pension
Funds with minimum corpus of Rs. 25 crore.
These entities are not required to be registered with SEBI as QIBs. Any entity falling under
the categories specified above is considered as a QIB for the purpose of participating in the
primary issuance process.
4.5 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS
1. The main function of SEBI is:
to protect the interests of investors in securities
to promote the development of the securities market
to regulate securities market (d) all the above.
44
2. SEBI in respect of certain matters, has the same powers:
(a) as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), while
trying a suit,
(b) as are vested in a criminal court under the Criminal Procedure Code while trying a suit
(c) as the Company Law Board
(d) none.
3. One of the following categories of investors need not obtain a certificate of
registration from SEBI in order to buy, sell or deal in securities:
(a) stock broker (b) portfolio manager
(c) investment adviser(d) retail investor.
4. The ownership, management and trading functions of a stock exchange are clearly
segregated in respect of
(a) Demutualised exchange (b) Corporatised exchange
(c) Any stock exchange (d) None.
5. The issue of new securities to existing shareholders at a ratio to those already held is
known as:
(a) Rights Issue/Rights Shares (b) Bonus Issue
(c) Preference Issue (d) None.
6. Initial Public Offering (IPO) means that an unlisted company makes to the public for
the first time:
(a) a fresh issue of securities (b) offers its existing securities for sale
(c) both the above (d) none.
7. As per SEBI guidelines, in a Book Building process the cap in the price band
(a)should be at least 10 per cent of the floor price
(b) should not be more than 20 per cent of the floor price
(c) no limits (d) None.
8. 'Retail individual investor' means an investor who applies or bids
(a) for securities of or for a value of not more than Rs. 1,00,000
(b) for securities of face value of not more than Rs. 1,00,000
for securities of 1000 units (d) none.
9. As per SEBI guidelines, safety net arrangements can be made available only to:
(a) all original resident individual allottees limited up to a maximum of 1000 shares per
allottee
(b) all original allottees limited up to a maximum of 1000 shares per allottee
(c) all shareholders limited up to a maximum of 1000 shares per shareholder
(d) none.
10. Red Herring Prospectus is a prospectus
(a) which is issued in red colour
(b) which contains some clauses in red colour
(c)which does not have details of either price or number of shares being offered or the
amount of issue
(d) none.
4.6 ANSWERS TO 'CHECK YOUR PROGRESS
'1. (d), 2. (a), 3. (d) 4. (a), 5. (a), 6. (c), 7. (b), 8. (a), 9. (a), 10. (c).
4.7 KEYWORDS
Collective investment scheme, Equity shares, Rolling settlement, Offer document, Safety net.
ROLE AND FUNCTIONS OF MUTUAL FUNDS
STRUCTURE
5.0 Objectives
5,1 What is a Mutual Fund?
5.2 Management of Mutual Funds
5.3 Different Types of Mutual Fund Schemes
5.3.1 Repurchase or Redemption Price
5.4 Role of Mutual Funds in the Capital Market
5.5 Check Your Progress
5.6 Answers to 'Check Your Progress'
5.7 Keywords
46
5.0 OBJECTIVES
On reading this unit, you will be able to
understand the concept of mutual funds in India,
know about the regulatory requirements regarding a mutual fund,
know about different types of mutual fund schemes,
understand the role of intermediaries/distributors in the functioning of mutual funds, and
understand the concept of universal banking.
5.1 WHAT IS A MUTUAL FUND?
Mutual fund is a mechanism for pooling resources from the public by issuing units to them
and investing the funds, so collected in securities in accordance with objectives as disclosed
in an offer document. Mutual fund issues units to investors in accordance with the quantum
of money invested by them. Investors of mutual funds are known as unit holders. The profits
or losses of fund/plan are shared by the investors in proportion to their investments. A mutual
fund is required to be registered with SEBI, which regulates the securities markets before it
can collect funds from the public. SEBI formulates the policies and regulates the mutual
funds to protect the interest of the investors.
5.2 MANAGEMENT OF MUTUAL FUNDS
A mutual fund is set up in the form of a trust, which has sponsors, trustees, Asset
Management Companies (AMCs) and custodians. The trust is established by a sponsor or
more than one sponsor. A sponsor is like a promoter of a company. The trustees of the mutual
fund hold its property for the benefit of the unit holders. An AMC approved by SEBI
manages the funds by making investments in various types of securities. A custodian, who is
also registered with SEBI, holds the securities of the various schemes of the fund in its
custody. The trustees are vested with the general power of superintendence and direction over
the AMC. They monitor the performance and compliance of SEBI regulations by the mutual
fund.
SEBI regulations require that at least two-thirds of the directors of the trustee company or
board of trustees must be independent, i.e. they should not be associated with the sponsors.
Also, 50 per cent of the directors of the AMC must be independent.
The performance of a particular scheme of a mutual fund is denoted by Net Asset Value
(NAV). The NAV per unit is the market value of securities of a scheme, less the expenses
incurred on the scheme, divided by the total number of units of the scheme on any particular
date. NAV is required to be dis¬closed by the mutual funds on a regular basis - daily or
weekly - depending upon the type of scheme.
5.3 DIFFERENT TYPES OF MUTUAL FUND SCHEMES
A mutual fund scheme can be classified into an open-ended fund or a close-ended fund
depending on its maturity period. A scheme can also be classified as a Growth Fund, Income
Fund, or Balanced Fund considering its investment objective.
Open-ended Scheme/Plan: An open-ended scheme/plan is one that is available for
subscription and repurchase on a continuous basis. These schemes do not have fixed maturity
periods. Investors can conveniently buy and sell units at NAV related prices which are
declared on a daily basis. The mutual fund buys and sells units regularly. The key feature of
the open-ended schemes is liquidity.
Close-ended Scheme/Plan: A close-ended scheme/plan has a stipulated maturity period, e.g.
3-10 years. The fund is open for subscription only during a specified period at the time of
launch of the scheme. Investors can invest in the scheme at the time of the initial public offer
and thereafter they can
47
buy or sell the units of the scheme on the stock exchanges in case the units are listed in a
recognised stock exchange. In order to provide an exit route to the investors, some close-
ended funds give an option of selling back the units to the mutual fund through periodic
repurchase at NAV related prices. SEBI regulations stipulate that at least one of the two exit
routes be provided to the investor, i.e. either repurchase facility or through listing on stock
exchanges. These mutual fund schemes disclose NAV generally on a weekly basis.
Growth Scheme/Equity Oriented Scheme: The aim of growth funds is to provide capital
appreciation over medium- to long-term period. Such schemes normally invest a major part
of their corpus in equities. Such funds have comparatively higher risks. These schemes
provide different options to the investors like dividend option, capital appreciation etc. and
the investors may choose an option depending on their preferences.
Income Scheme/Debt Oriented Scheme: The aim of income funds is to provide regular and
steady income to investors. Such schemes generally invest in fixed income securities such as
bonds, corporate debentures, government securities and money market instruments. Such
funds are less risky compared to equity schemes. These funds are not affected by fluctuations
in equity markets. Opportunities of capital appreciation, however, are also limited in such
funds. The NAVs of such funds are affected because of change in interest rates in the country.
If the interest rates fall, NAVs of such funds are likely to increase in the short run and vice-
versa.
Balanced Plan/Scheme: Balanced plans are used to provide both growth and regular income,
as such schemes invest both in equities and fixed income securities in the proportion
indicated in their offer documents. They generally invest 40-60 per cent in equity and debt
instruments. These funds are also affected by fluctuations in share prices in the stock markets.
NAVs of such funds are however likely to be less volatile as compared to pure equity funds.
Money Market or Liquid Fund: These funds are also income funds and their aim is to provide
easy liquidity, preservation of capital and to ensure a moderate income. These schemes invest
exclusively in safer short-term instruments such as treasury bills, certificates of deposit,
commercial paper and inter bank call money, government securities etc. Returns on these
schemes fluctuate much less compared to other funds.
Gilt Fund: These funds invest exclusively in government securities. Government securities
have no default risk. NAVs of these schemes also fluctuate due to change in interest rates and
other economic factors as is the case with income or debt oriented schemes.
Index Funds: Index funds replicate the portfolio of a particular index such as the BSE
sensitive index, S&P NSE 50 index (Nifty), etc. These schemes invest in the securities in the
same weightage comprising an index. NAVs of such schemes would rise or fall in accordance
with the rise or fall in the index, though not exactly by the same percentage due to some
factors known as 'tracking error' in technical terms.
There are also exchange traded index funds launched by the mutual funds which are traded
on the stock exchanges.
Sector Specific Funds: These are the funds/schemes which invest in the securities of only
those sectors or industries as specified in the offer documents, e.g. Pharmaceuticals,
Software, Fast Moving Consumer Goods (FMCG), Petroleum stocks etc. The returns in these
funds are dependent on the performance of the respective sectors/industries. While these
funds may give higher returns, they are more risky compared to the diversified funds.
Investors need to keep a watch on the performance of those sectors/industries and must exit at
an appropriate time. They may also seek the advice of an expert.
Tax Saving Schemes: These schemes offer tax rebates to the investors under specific
provisions of the
48
Income Tax Act, 1961, as the Government offers tax incentives for investment in specified
avenues, e.g. Equity Linked Savings Scheme (ELSS). Pension schemes, launched by the
mutual funds also offer tax benefits. These schemes are growth oriented and invest
predominantly in equities. Their growth opportunities and the risks associated are like any
equity oriented scheme.
Fund of Funds (FoF): A scheme that invests primarily in other schemes of the same mutual
fund or other mutual funds is known as a Fund of Funds (FoF) scheme. An FoF scheme
enables the investors to achieve greater diversification through one scheme. It spreads risks
across a greater universe.
5.3.1 Repurchase or Redemption Price
Repurchase or redemption price is the price or NAV at which an open-ended scheme
purchases or redeems its units from the unit holders. Subject to provisions in each scheme or
fund it is generally seen that fund houses stipulate an exit load. Thus, an investor getting out
of a scheme will get an amount equal to NAV minus exit load, if any.
Assured Return Scheme: Assured return schemes are those schemes that assure a specific
return to the unit holders irrespective of performance of the scheme.
A scheme cannot promise returns unless such returns are fully guaranteed by the sponsor or
AMC and this is required to be disclosed in the offer document.
5.4 ROLE OF MUTUAL FUNDS IN THE CAPITAL MARKET
Mutual funds are emerging as an important financial intermediary for the investing public in
India. Conceptually and operationally they are different from banks. The key channel in
bringing the mutual funds to a large number of investors all over the country is the network
of intermediaries/distributors. These intermediaries/distributors have to take on the role of
financial advisors to investors.
SEBI has made it mandatory for any entity/person engaged in marketing and selling of
mutual fund products to pass the Association of Mutual Funds in India (AMFI) certification
test (Advisors Module) and obtain a registration number from AMFI. Firms and corporates
will have to obtain certificate of registration from AMFI and all employees of corporate
distributors engaged in selling and marketing of mutual fund products have to pass the AMFI
certification test (Advisors Module) and obtain registration with AMFI before canvassing the
business of mutual funds.
These days, banks also enroll themselves as corporate distributors and have started marketing
mutual fund products by using their large branch networks and the existing infrastructure.
Since mutual funds pay around 1.5 to 2.5 per cent of the business canvassed, as
brokerage/commission to the distributors, the banks also get an additional avenue for earning
fee-based income. Further, the mutual fund products also suit their bouquet of financial
products which could be sold under one roof as a financial supermarket.
5.5 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS
1.A mutual fund is set up in the form of:
(a) a trust
(b) a Company incorporated under the Indian Companies Act
(c) by an Act of Parliament
(d) none.
2.A mutual fund has, apart from its sponsors:
(a) Trustees (b) Asset Management Company
(c) Custodian (d) All of the above.
49
3. The main function of an Asset Management Company is to:
(a) hold the securities of various schemes
(b) manage the funds by making investments in various types of securities
(c) hold its property for the benefit of the unit holders
(d) all the above.
4. NAV is required to be disclosed by the mutual funds on a ---- on -----basis:
(a) daily (b) weekly
(c) depending on the type of scheme (d) none.
5. A Fund of Funds is a scheme that invests primarily:
(a) in money market instruments
(b) in other schemes of the same mutual fund or other mutual funds
(c) in the bullion market
(d) only in primary market.
6. The aim of balanced funds is to provide:
(a) growth (capital appreciation) (b) regular income
(c) both growth and regular income (d) none.
7. As per SEBI guidelines, any entity/person engaged in the marketing and selling of
mutual fund products is required to pass a certification test and obtain a registration number
from:
(a) SEBI (b) AMFI
(c) NSE (d) None.
5.6 ANSWERS TO CHECK YOUR PROGRESS'
1. (a), 2. (d), 3. (b), 4. (c), 5. (b), 6. (c), 7. (b).
5.7 KEYWORDS
Custodian, Asset Management Company (AMC), Net Asset Value (NAV), Universal
Banking.
ROLE AND FUNCTIONS OF INSURANCE COMPANIES, BANCASSURANCE AND
INSURANCE REGULATORY AND DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY (IRDA)
STRUCTURE
6.0 Objectives
6.1 The Role and Function of Insurance Companies
6.1.1 Introduction
6.1.2 Players in the Indian Insurance Market
6.1.3 Opening up of the Insurance Sector
6.1.4 Regulatory Requirements of the Industry
6.1.5 Types of Insurance Business
6.1.6 Insurance Products
6.1.7 Life Insurance
6.1.8 Advantages of Life Insurance: Financial Protection
6.1.9 Group Insurance Schemes
6.1.10 Agents and Insurance Intermediaries
6.2 Bancassurance
6.2.1 Bancassurance in India
6.2.2 Convergence of Banking and Insurance
6.2.3 Bancassurance Models
6.3 Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA)
6.3.1 Duties, Powers and Functions of IRDA
6.4 Check Your Progress
6.5 Answers to 'Check Your Progress'
6.6 Keywords
52
OBJECTIVES
Reading through this unit will enable the reader to.
(a) understand the historical background of the insurance industry in India.
(b)know the regulatory requirements of the industry,
(c)know the different types of insurance policies and the new products introduced,
(d)know about bancassurance and its models,
(e) know about Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority and its functions and
powers,
(f)know the role of intermediaries/agents in the industry and their licensing requirements.
6.1 THE ROLE AND FUNCTION OF INSURANCE COMPANIES
6.1.1 Introduction
The Indian Insurance Industry is as old as it is in any other part of the world. The first
insurance company in India was started in 1818 in Kolkata. We had a number of foreign and
Indian insurers operating in the Indian market till the nationalisation of the industry took
place. The reasons for the nationalisation of the industry are concerned mostly with the
unethical practices adopted by some of the players against the interests of the insurance
consumers. Nationalisation has lent the industry solidity, growth and outreach, which is
unparalleled. Along with these achievements there however also grew a feeling of
insensitivity to the needs of the market, tardiness in the adoption of modern practices to
upgrade technical skills coupled with a sense of lethargy, which probably led to a feeling
amongst the public that the insurance industry was not fully responsive to customer needs.
The committee on reforms in the insurance sector went into the question of reforms in the
insurance sector recommended in 1994, opening the sector to private participation to induce a
spirit of competition amongst the various insurers and to provide a choice to the consumers. It
was also the hope of the Committee that such a broad-basing of the industry will ensure a
better penetration of the insurance market of the country in terms of the Gross Domestic
Product (GDP), which remains at very low levels in comparison to some of the developing
countries in the Asian region.
6.1.2 Players in the Indian Insurance Market
The insurance industry, till the year 1999-2000, comprised mainly of two players. In the life
insurance segment, Life Insurance Corporation (LIC) of India Ltd. was the sole player and in
the general insurance segment, General Insurance Corporation of India (GIC) was the player
with its four subsidiaries, namely,
(a) The Oriental Insurance Company Limited.
(b) The New India Assurance Company Limited.
(c) National Insurance Company Limited.
(d) United India Insurance Company Limited
GIC has been converted into a National reinsurer and these four subsidiaries have been
delinked from the parent company and made into an independent insurance company (with
effect from December 2000).
6.1.3 Opening Up of the Insurance Sector
The insurance sector was opened up in the year 1999, facilitating entry of private players into
the industry. The entry level capital requirements were kept sufficiently high at Rs. 1 crore to
deter corporates other than those who had sufficiently long-term interests and which had the
capability to continuously raise funds through equity contributions from the promoters till
such time as the operations stabilise. The regulatory framework, which was designed for the
operation of insurance companies, laid down the ground rules for insurers and is equally
applicable to both the state-owned and the private insurers.
The new environment has facilitated competitive conditions and the industry has exhibited a
healthy growth trend, in both the life and non-life segments. The new players not only
succeeded in establishing themselves, but also captured a healthy market share. The existing
insurers have also been able to show growth in the premium underwritten by them.
Currently, as per IRDA's annual report, 2005-06, there are fourteen life and fourteen non-life
insurance companies. Out of the non-life insurance companies, two are specialised insurance
companies, viz., Agricultural Insurance Company, which handles crop insurance business and
Export Credit Guarantee Corporation, which only transacts export credit insurance.
Number of Registered Insurers in India
TABLE 6.1: Registered Insurers in India
Types of Business Public Sector Private Sector Total
Life Insurance
General Insurance Reinsurance 1
6
1 13
8
0 14
14
1
Total 8 21 29
6.1.4 Regulatory Requirements of the Industry
In the year 2000, the IRDA was constituted as an autonomous body to regulate and develop
the business of insurance and reinsurance in the country in terms of the Insurance Regulatory
& Development Authority Act, 1999. The Authority has been entrusted with the requisite
regulations in the areas of registration of insurers, their conduct of business, solvency
margins, conduct of reinsurance business, licensing and code of conduct of intermediaries,
etc. The Indian insurance market is thus run and regulated on globally acceptable standards.
6.1.5 Types of Insurance Business
Insurance business is divided into four classes:
(a) Life Insurance
(c) Marine Insurance
(b) Fire Insurance
(d) Miscellaneous Insurance.
Life Insurers transact life insurance business; General Insurers transact the rest. No
composites are permitted as per the law.
Legislation: Insurance is a federal subject in India. The primary legislations that deal with the
insurance business in India are:
• Insurance Act, 1938, and
• Insurance Regulatory & Development Authority Act, 1999.
6.1.6 Insurance Products
Life Insurance
Popular Products: Endowment Assurance (Participating), Money Back (Participating) and
Term Assurance (Non-Participating) Policies. More than 80 per cent of the life insurance
business is from these products.
General Insurance
Fire and miscellaneous insurance businesses are predominant in this category. Motor vehicle
insurance is compulsory.
The Tariff Advisory Committee (TAC) lays down tariff rates for some of the general
insurance products.
Several new products have been launched by life insurers. These include the Unit Linked
Insurance Products (ULIP).
Contract of Insurance
A contract of insurance is a contract of utmost good faith, technically known as uberrima
fides. The doctrine of disclosing all material facts is embodied in this important principle,
which applies to all forms of insurance.
At the time of buying a policy, the policyholder should ensure that all questions in the
proposal form are correctly answered. Any misrepresentation, non-disclosure or fraud in any
document, leading to the acceptance of the risk would render the insurance contract null and
void.
6.1.7 Life Insurance
Life insurance is a contract that pledges payment of an amount to the person assured (or his
nominee) on the occurrence of the event insured against.
The contract is valid for payment of the insured amount during:
• the date of maturity, or • specified dates at periodic intervals, or
• unfortunate death, if it occurs earlier.
Among other things, the contract also provides for the payment of a premium periodically to
the insurer by the policyholder. Life insurance is universally acknowledged to be a
mechanism, which eliminates 'risk', substituting certainty for uncertainty and comes to the
timely aid of the family in the unfortunate event of death of the breadwinner.
By and large, life insurance is civilisation's partial solution to the problems caused by death.
Life insurance, in short, is concerned with two hazards that stand across the life path of every
person:
1. Premature death and leaving a dependent family to fend for itself.
2. Living till old age without a visible means of support.
6.1.8 Advantages of Life Insurance: Financial Protection
Savings through life insurance guarantee protection against the risk of death of the saver.
Moreover, in case of demise, life insurance assures payment of the entire amount assured
(with bonuses wherever applicable) whereas in other saving schemes, only the amount saved
(with interest) is payable.
Aid to Thrift: Life insurance encourages 'thrift'. It allows long-term savings since payments
can be made effortlessly because of the 'easy instalment' facility built into the scheme
(premium payment for insurance could be monthly, quarterly, half-yearly or yearly).
For example: The Salary Saving Scheme, popularly known as SSS, provides a convenient
method of paying the premium each month by deducting the amount from one's salary.
In this case, the employer directly pays the deducted premium to the insurer.
Liquidity: It is easy to acquire loans on the sole security of any policy that has acquired a loan
value. Besides, a life insurance policy is also generally accepted as security, even for a
commercial loan.
Tax Relief: Life insurance is the best way to enjoy tax deductions on income tax and wealth
tax. Tax rebates/concessions are available for amounts paid, by way of premium for life
insurance. In such cases the assured, in effect, pays a lower premium for insurance than
otherwise.
Money when You Need It: A policy that has a suitable insurance plan or a combination of
different plans can be effectively used to meet certain financial needs that may arise from
time to time such as children's education or marriage provision or even periodical needs for
cash over a stretch of time can be made less stressful through life insurance.
55
Alternatively, policy money can be made available at the time of one's retirement from
service and used for any specific purpose, such as, purchase of a house or for other
investments. Loans are also granted to policyholders for house building or for purchase of
flats (subject to certain conditions).
Medical and Non-Medical Schemes: Life insurance is normally offered after a medical
examination of the life to be assured. However, to facilitate greater spread of insurance and
also to avoid inconvenience, insurance companies extend insurance cover without any
medical examination, subject to certain conditions.
With Profit and Without Profit Plans: An insurance policy can be 'with' or 'without' profit. In
the former, bonuses disclosed, if any, after periodical valuations, are allotted to the policy and
are payable along with the contracted amount.
In 'without' profit plan, the contracted amount is paid without any addition. The premium rate
charged for a 'with' profit policy is therefore higher than for a 'without' profit policy.
Keyman Insurance: Keyman insurance is taken by a business firm on the life of key
employee(s) to protect the firm against financial losses, which may occur due to the
premature demise of the Keyman.
6.1.9 Group Insurance Schemes
Group insurance is a plan of insurance which provides life cover to a number of persons
under a single policy called the 'Master Policy'. Under the single contract, many persons are
covered. It becomes possible to give a cover to the group at a low cost, on account of savings
in the administrative and medical examination expenses. One important feature is with regard
to selection and underwriting of lives, Individual lives are not assessed. The selection is of the
group. Group selection is aimed at forming a group, which will show an average rate of
mortality.
Introduction of New Products
The opening up of the sector has resulted in introduction of new products, particularly the
unit linked products, which offer both capital appreciation and insurance cover and have
attracted the attention of the insured. Today, a wider choice is available to the customer, with
products being tailor-made to suit the needs of the insured. Availability of riders, particularly
health riders, has been a positive development. The insurers are putting in efforts to develop
products, both in the life and non-life segments. In the non-life segment, a private insurer first
launched weather insurance in the country. Other products launched by non-life insurers
include mutual fund package policy, pollution liability package policy and export credit
(short-term) policy — initiatives which the new players have taken. Additional covers have
also been launched by Export Credit Guarantee Corporation (ECGC) in the area of credit
insurance.
6.1.10 Agents and Insurance Intermediaries
Agents and corporate agents are key distribution channels to any insurer. Development of
these agencies must be on the best professional lines. Towards this, the IRDA has prescribed,
minimum educational qualifications at the point of entry and practical training followed by an
examination. To aid the growth of insurance selling in rural and non-urban centres,
compulsory targets which individual insurers are required to fulfil have been prescribed.
IRDA has also lowered the required minimum educational qualification for rural agents to a
pass in the tenth standard examination. It has also encouraged the Insurance Institute of India,
to conduct the qualifying examination for the agents and to bring out books and training
material in various vernacular languages.
Customer Protection
The insurance industry has ombudsmen in 12 cities. Each ombudsman is empowered to
redress customer grievances in respect of insurance contracts on personal lives, where the
insured amount is less than Rs. 20 lakh, in accordance with the ombudsman scheme.
Role of Insurance Industry in the Indian Economy
The insurance sector is a major contributor to the financial savings of the household sector in
the country, which are further channelised into various investment avenues. As per
preliminary estimates, contribution of insurance funds to the financial savings was 14.9 per
cent in 2003-04, viz., 2.2 per cent of the GDP at current market prices. Life insurance funds,
postal insurance and state insurance contributed 14.5 per cent, 0.1 per cent and 0.3 per cent,
respectively. The percentage of life insurance funds to the GDP at current market prices
increased from 2.1 per cent in the previous year. Significantly, the contribution of provident
and pension funds to financial savings decreased to 13 per cent as against 14.3 per cent in the
previous year. The overall growth in the insurance industry has been positive.
Global players have exhibited an interest in the huge market that India offers. Given that 42.9
per cent of the financial savings are parked with the banking sector, there is a vast potential
for the insurance sector to grow. Today, India accounts for only 0.59 per cent of the US$
2,940.67 billion global insurance market. Many international studies have estimated that the
insurance industry in India can grow by over 125 per cent in the next ten years. In fact, India
has been identified as one of the two fastest growing insurance markets. The growth in the
life segment is expected to be faster, as against the non-life segment. In the environment that
has been created subsequent to the opening up of the insurance sector, the players in the
industry are expected to create additional markets by enhancing the level of risk awareness
amongst the uninsured public, thereby spreading both the message and the associated benefits
of insurance across a wider cross-section. The liberalised environment is also expected to
improve the levels of customer satisfaction. New products are also expected to be introduced
to take care of the unattended risk exposures.
6.2 BANCASSURANCE
Bancassurance is an arrangement whereby branches of commercial banks act as corporate
agents and distribute insurance products developed by insurance companies to their
customers. It is nothing but a convergence of banking and insurance.
6.2.1 Bancassurance in India
The banking industry in India has been experiencing, since the early nineties, shrinkage in
their interest income subsequent to migrating to the adoption of international best practices
and standards of accoun¬ting. With the opening up of the banking sector to private and
international players due to liberalisation, competition has become much severe and intense,
resulting in a further shrinkage of margins in the industry. In order to augment their income
from other sources, the banks were keenly waiting for an opportunity. Realising the changes,
the Government of India, during August 2000, issued a notification specifying 'Insurance' as a
permissible form of business that could be undertaken by banks under Section 6(1 )(o) of the
Banking Regulation Act, 1949. The RBI, in its 'Monetary and Credit Policy for the year 2000-
01' announced its intention to allow banks' entry into insurance business and issued detailed
guidelines in August 2000. Accordingly, any bank intending to undertake insurance business
in the manner set out below should obtain prior approval of RBI before engaging in such
business:
1. Any scheduled commercial bank would be permitted to undertake insurance business
as an agent of insurance companies on a fee basis, without any risk participation. The
subsidiaries of banks will also be allowed to undertake distribution of insurance products on
an agency basis.
2. Banks that satisfy certain eligibility criteria will be permitted to set up a joint venture
company for
undertaking insurance business with risk participation, subject to safeguards.
As the banks in India have a vast network of branches spread across the country and huge
manpower strength, this convergence of banking and insurance came as a boon to the
insurance industry. Insurance companies find bancassurance profitable due to a quicker reach
to untapped market, economies of scale in administrative cost and opportunity to introduce
new hybrid products. This prompted the insurance companies to reshape their distribution
channels and utilise the banks' large network in acquiring their customers at low cost.
6.2.2 Convergence of Banking and Insurance
The advantages to banks are many, viz., improved customer retention, overall customer
satisfaction, provision of a very good avenue for earning risk free non-interest income by
means of commission over a long period, improvement in bottom lines, higher employee
productivity and also improved return on assets (RoA), as they utilise only the existing
infrastructure and available manpower. There is no requirement of additional capital as
bancassurance is totally risk free.
6.2.3 Bancassurance Models
Internationally, four models of Bancassurance are in vogue. They are:
(a) Corporate agency model or distribution alliance model.
(b) Joint venture model, where an insurance company and a bank share the equity capital
of their joint venture, subject to local government regulations.
(c) Merger between a bank and an insurer.
(d) Build or buy own insurance operation.
In India, only the first two models have been adopted. Though a couple of years ago, LIC of
India acquired a strategic and significant stake in the equity capital of Corporation Bank and
Oriental Bank of Commerce, they too follow the first model only.
Apart from distributing their conventional insurance products, both life and non-life, through
bancassurance, some insurance companies have designed innovative, across the counter
products under group insurance, which can be marketed easily to a large section of the bank's
customers. Even the Government of India has also utilised the bancassurance model to design
and deliver certain insurance products to the people living below the poverty line as a part of
its social upliftment programme (Jana Shree Bima Yojana and Universal Health Care
Policies).
6.3 INSURANCE REGULATORY AND DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY (IRDA)
The Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA) was constituted as an
autonomous body to regulate and develop the business of insurance and reinsurance in the
country in terms of the IRDA Act, 1999. The Authority was constituted on 19 April 2000 vide
Government of India's notification no. 277. The key objective of the IRDA is to promote
market efficiency and ensure consumer protection.
6.3.1 Duties, Powers and Functions of IRDA
The IRDA shall have the duty to regulate, promote and ensure an orderly growth of the
insurance business and reinsurance business.
The powers and functions of the IRDA shall include:
(a) issuing to the applicant a certificate of registration, renew, modify, withdraw, suspend
or cancel
such registration;
(b) protection of the interests of the policy holders in matters concerning assigning of
policy, nomination
by policy holders, insurable interest, settlement of insurance claim, surrender value of policy
and other terms and conditions of contracts of insurance;
(c) specifying requisite qualifications, code of conduct and practical training for
intermediary or insurance intermediaries and agents;
(d) specifying the code of conduct for surveyors and loss assessors; (ej promoting efficiency
in the conduct of insurance business;
(e) promoting and regulating professional organisations connected with the insurance and
reinsurance business;
(f) levying fees and other charges for carrying out the purposes of this Act;
(h) calling for information from, undertaking inspection of, conducting enquiries and
investigations including audit of the insurers, intermediaries, insurance intermediaries and
other organizations connected with the insurance business;
(i) control and regulation of the rates, advantages, terms and conditions that may be offered
by insurers in respect of general insurance business not so controlled and regulated by the
TAC under Section 64U of the Insurance Act, 1938 (4 of 1938);
(j) specifying the form and manner in which books of account shall be maintained and
statement of accounts shall be rendered by insurers and other insurance intermediaries;
(k) regulating investment of funds by insurance companies;
(1) regulating maintenance of the margin of solvency;
(m) adjudication of disputes between insurers and intermediaries or insurance intermediaries;
(n) supervising the functioning of the TAC; (o) specifying the percentage of premium income
of the insurer to finance schemes for promoting and regulating professional organisations
referred to in clause (f); (p) specifying the percentage of life insurance business and general
insurance business to be undertaken by the insurer in the rural or social sector; and
(o) exercising such other powers as may be prescribed.
6.4 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS
1. The first insurance company was started in India in 1818 at:
(a) Kolkata (b) Chennai (c) Mumbai (d) New Delhi.
2. The entry level capital requirement for a new Insurance Company in India is:
(a) Rs.lOOcrore (b) Rs. 50 crore (c) Rs. 500 crore (d) None.
3. As on 31 March 2006, the total number of insurance companies in the life insurance
business is:
(a) 15 (b) 14 (c) 1 (d) None.
4. The primary legislation that deals with insurance business in India is:
(a) Insurance Act, 1938 (b) Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999
(c) Both Insurance Act, 1938 and IRDA Act, 1999
(d) LIC of India Act.
5. Bancassurance is an arrangement whereby:
(a) branches of commercial banks distribute to their customers as corporate agents,
insurance products developed by the insurance companies
(b) branches of Insurance companies distribute to their customers as corporate agents,
banking products developed by banks
(c) both (a) and (b) (d) none.
6.5 ANSWERS TO 'CHECK YOUR PROGRESS'
1. ((a) , 2. (a), 3. (b), 4. (c), 5. (a).
6.6 KEYWORDS
Life insurance, Fire insurance, Marine insurance, Bancassurance, Keyman insurance, Group
insurance.
FACTORING, FORFAITING SERVICES AND OFF-BALANCE ITEMS
STRUCTURE
7.0 Objectives
7.1 Factoring
7.1.1 Introduction
7.1.2 Types of Factoring
7.1.3 Advantages of Factoring
7.2 Forfaiting Services
7.2.1 Forfaiting - Definition
7.2.2 Mechanism of Forfaiting
7.2.3 Advantages of Forfaiting
7.3 Off-Balance Sheet Items
7.3.1 Guarantees
7.3.2 Letter of Credit
7.3.3 Forward Exchange Contract
7.3.4 Forward Rate Agreement (FRA) and Interest Rate Swap (IRS)
7.4 Check Your Progress
7.5 Answers to 'Check Your Progress'
7.6 Keywords
7.0 OBJECTIVES
By reading this unit, you will be able to:
• Understand factoring services, difference between bill discounting and factoring
services and its advantages,
• Learn about the 'Forfaiting' services and its advantages to the exporting community,
• Familiarise with the items appearing as off-balance items.
7.1 FACTORING
7.1.1 Introduction
Factoring is a service that is concerned with the financing and collection of account
receivables in domestic and international trade. It is an ongoing arrangement between the
client and factor (usually a bank or a financial institution), where invoices raised on open
account sales of goods and services are regularly assigned to 'the factor' for financing,
collection and sales ledger administration. The buyer and the seller usually have long-term
relationships. The client sells invoiced receivables at a discount to the factor to raise finance
for working capital requirement. The factor may or may not accept the incumbent credit risk.
Factoring enables companies to sell their outstanding book debts for cash.
7.1.2 Types of Factoring
There are two types of factoring services, recourse factoring (with recourse) and non-recourse
factoring (without recourse). In recourse factoring, in the case of non-payment of invoices by
customers, the factor will recover the amount advanced from the client. In non-recourse
factoring, the factor provides both finance and credit protection. In case of non-payment of
invoices by customers, the factor will bear the risk of bad debts.
The factor operates by buying from the selling company, their invoiced debts. These are
purchased usually with credit protection by the factor, 'who' then will be responsible for all
credit control, collection and sales accounting work. The management of the company may
thus concentrate on production and sales and need not concern itself with non-profitable
control and sales accounting matters.
Domestic Factoring
Under domestic factoring, receivables arising only out of domestic trade shall be considered
for factoring. The supplier/borrower shall draw bills of exchange for goods supplied and the
purchaser shall accept that. After acceptance of bills of exchange, the factor shall make a
prepayment of about 80 per cent of invoice value after deducting its discount charges at
normal interest rates for the period of bill of exchange to the supplier. The balance payment
(20 per cent of the invoice value) shall be made after collecting the payment from the
purchaser. If the purchaser fails to pay the due amount on due dates, the supplier shall make
good the payment. The borrower/supplier shall submit the bill of exchange along with the
invoice and LR/RR receipts.
The maximum debt period normally permitted under factoring is one hundred and fifty days
inclusive of a maximum grace period of sixty days.
Various Management Information System (MIS) reports such as Debtors Ageing Analysis,
Weekly Statement of Accounts, Sales Analysis and Statement of Outstanding Invoices are
given to the seller by the factor. To be eligible for factoring, suppliers must have a minimum
track record of certain years of existence in business with consistent profitability and a
positive minimum net worth.
Usually, before providing advance payments to the supplier, an agreement is entered with the
supplier for assigning the debts of the purchaser to the factor and the later makes advances
only against invoices drawn on this particular purchaser. Sub-limit of each purchaser is fixed
and sum of these sub-limit is the overall limit of the supplier. Usually, the purchaser should
have been dealing with the supplier for a certain minimum period to be eligible for factoring.
The limit for factoring is usually fixed on the basis of the projected receivables on credit sales
of the company and deducting existing bills/book debts limits enjoyed by the company from
their bank.
Normally, the charges for factoring will consist of (i) Finance charge for purchase of
receivables (the finance charge moves in tandem with the market interest rates and is
determined on the basis of credit rating), (ii) Service charges for collection, follow-up,
administration, etc. (The service charge varies from 0.1 per cent to 2.0 per cent of the invoice
value and is determined on the basis of value of invoices submitted to the factors.)
International Factoring
In international factoring, there are usually two factors. The export factor looks at financing
the exporter and sales administration (presenting invoices at the right time and collecting
payments being the key tasks). The import factor is interested in evaluating the buyer,
collecting the money on time at the same time ensuring that he is protected against default.
International factoring encompasses all the four services, i.e. pre-payments, sales ledger
administration, credit protection and collections.
Let us understand the important steps involved in international factoring. The importer places
the order for purchase of goods with the exporter.
The exporter requests the export factor for limit approval on the importer. The export factor,
in turn, forwards this request to an import factor in the Importer's country. The import factor
evaluates the importer and conveys its approval to the export factor who in turn conveys
commencement of the factoring arrangement to the exporter. The exporter delivers the goods
to the importer. The exporter produces the documents to the export factor.
The export factor disburses funds to the exporter up to the prepayment amount decided and at
the same time forwards the documents to the import factor.
The importer, on the due date of the invoice, pays the import factor, who in turn remits this
payment to the export factor. The export factor applies the received funds to the outstanding
amount of the advance against the invoice. The exporter receives the balance payment.
7.1.3 Advantages of Factoring
Factoring replaces high cost market credit and enables purchases on cash basis for availing
cash discounts.
(a)The customer gets instant finance against each invoice.
(b)Low margin (up to 20 per cent) thereby improving cash flow.
(c) The customer gets large credit/grace period.
(d)Each invoice is followed up for payment by the factor on the due date and thereafter.
(e) MIS reports and sales ledger administration is totally taken care of by the factor.
(f)Factoring accelerates receivables turnover, and improves operating cycle, resulting in more
production, larger sales, higher profits and increased ROI.
7.2 FORFAITING SERVICES
7.2.1 Forfaiting – Definition
Forfeiting is a means of finance (credit) an exporter of goods avails from an intermediary
called the forfaiter against the export receivables but without the obligation to repay the
credit. Forfeiting is used for international trade transactions. In fact, it is the discounting of
trade receivables such as drafts drawn under letters of credit, bills of exchange, promissory
notes, or other freely negotiable instruments on a 'no recourse' basis, (i.e. without recourse to
the exporter in case the importer fails to pay on the due date). It is a highly flexible technique
that allows an exporter to grant attractive credit terms to foreign buyers, without sacrificing
his cash flow and without the risks of possible late payment or default by the importer.
Simultaneously, the exporter is fully protected against interest and/or currency rates moving
unfavourably during the credit period as the entire risk is passed on to the forfaiter. Forfeiting
is thus a highly effective sales tool, which simultaneously improves cash flow and eliminates
risk for the exporter.
Some bankers define forfaiting as medium-term capital goods financing, by means of selling
a bill of exchange, at a discount, to a third party who is the forfaiter. This third party collects
the payment from an essentially overseas customer, through a collateral bank(s), thus,
assuming the underlying responsibility of exporters and simultaneously providing trade
finance for importers by converting a short-term loan to a medium-term one.
7.2.2 Mechanism of Forfaiting
The exporter identifies his importer and signs with him a contract for sale of his goods at a
price negotiated between them, giving the importer adequate credit period to pay for the
imports. The exporter will also inform the importer that the exporter would discount the sales
receivable with a forfaiter and assign the receivables to the forfaiter. The importer arranges
with his banker for issue of a letter of credit in favour of the exporter. The exporter enters into
a forfaiting contract with the forfaiter. Then the actual export takes place. The debt
instruments are drawn by the exporter (seller), accepted by the importer (buyer), and will be
backed by the unconditional standby letter of credit (guarantee) of the importer's bank. The
forfaiter sends these documents to the importer's bank, which in turn notifies receipt to the
forfaiter. The forfaiter makes payment to the exporter (100 per cent of the value of exports),
after deducting his discount and other incidental charges as per the contract. In exchange for
the payment, the forfaiter then takes over responsibility for claiming the debt from the
importer. The forfaiter either holds the notes till full maturity (as an investment), or sells them
to another investor on a non-recourse basis. The holder of the notes then presents each
receivable to the bank at which they are payable as they fall due.
The letter of credit does not have to be transferable or confirmed by the advising bank in the
exporter's country; but it must be subject to the Uniform Customs and Practice for
Documentary Credits (UCPDC) of the International Chamber of Commerce, Paris (UCP
500). Promissory notes or bills of exchange/ drafts are actually the most commonly forfaited
debt instruments. Under a forfaiting agreement, a promissory note or bill of exchange/draft is
issued for each installment of the supplier's credit, thus documenting the existence of a claim
of the exporter on the importer that is totally abstract, i.e. it is unconditional, irrevocable and
divorced from the underlying trade transaction.
Normally, the documents required by the forfaiter from the exporter will be as follows:
(a)Copy of supply contract or of its payment terms.
(b) Letter of credit or guarantee, which is the forfaiters' preferred form of security of payment
of a bill or note. For a LC/Guarantee to be acceptable, the issuing bank must be
internationally reputed and credit-worthy. The most important point to remember is that any
LC/guarantee should be irrevocable, unconditional, divisible and assignable.
(c) Copy of signed commercial invoice.
Copy of shipping documents including certificates of receipt, railway bill, airway bill, bill of
lading
or equivalent documents
63
(e) Letter of assignment and notification to the guarantor.
7.2.3 Advantages of Forfaiting
Forfeiting provides a flexible, creative alternative to traditional international trade financing
methods and is particularly useful for transactions with buyers in developing nations. The
following are the advantages of forfaiting to the exporters:
(a) Forfaiting provides 100 per cent financing - without recourse and not occupying
exporter's credit
line. That is to say once the exporter obtains the financed fund, he will be exempted from the
responsibility to repay the debt.
(b) Forfaiting improves cash flow of the exporter - by converting receivables into current
cash inflow
and it is beneficial to the exporter to improve his liquidity and his ability to improve further
the
fund raising capability.
(c) Forfaiting saves administration cost - by using forfaiting, the exporter will be freed
from the
management of the receivables. The relative costs, as a result, will be reduced greatly.
(d) Forfaiting increases trade opportunity - with forfaiting, the exporter is able to grant
credit to his
buyer freely and thus, be more competitive in the market.
(e) Forfaiting also helps to realise price transfer - the exporter can also transfer the
corresponding
financing cost into the sale price.
(f) Forfaiting enables the exporter to avoid various risks, i.e. forfaiting business enables
the exporter
to transfer various risks, resulting from deferred payment, such as interest-rate risk, currency
risk,
credit risk and political risk.
7.3 OFF-BALANCE SHEET ITEMS
Off-Balance Sheet Items are those items in the books of a bank, which are not mentioned in
the balance sheet of the bank. These items are not assets or liabilities to be reported in the
balance sheet as on the date of balance sheet, but may get converted into an asset or liability
at a later date, depending on the happening of a certain event. These items are contingent
upon certain breach of commitments and are also called contingent liabilities. These
contingent liabilities have to be disclosed as 'Notes to the Balance Sheet'. But once these
commitments crystallise, these also become part of the assets or liabilities of the bank and
have to be shown in the balance sheet. These items include:
(a) Direct credit substitutes, e.g. general guarantees of indebtedness (including standby
LCs serving as financial guarantees for loans and securities) and acceptances (including
endorsements with the
character of acceptance).
(b) Certain transaction-related contingent items (e.g. performance bonds, bid bonds,
warranties and
standby LCs related to particular transactions).
(c) Short-term self-liquidating trade-related contingencies (such as documentary credits
coUateralised
by the underlying shipments).
(d) Sale and repurchase agreement and asset sales with recourse, where the credit risk
remains with the bank.
(e) Forward asset purchases, forward deposits and partly paid shares and securities,
which represent commitments with certain drawdown.
(f) Note issuance facilities and revolving underwriting facilities.
(g) Aggregate outstanding foreign exchange contracts.
(h) Take-out finance in the books of taking over institution (i) Unconditional take-out finance
(ii) Conditional take-out finance (iii) Non-funded exposures to commercial real estate.
(i) Guarantees issued on behalf of stockbrokers and market makers.
(j) Commitment to provide liquidity facility for securitisation of standard asset transactions.
(k) Foreign exchange open position.
(1) Open position in gold.
(m) forward Rate agreement (FRA)/Interest Rate Swap (IRS).
Banks classify their off-balance sheet exposures into three broad categories - full risk (credit
substitutes) - standby letters of credit, money guarantees, etc.; medium risk (not direct credit
substitutes, which do not support existing financial obligations) - bid bonds, letters of credit,
indemnities and warranties; and low risk - reverse repos, currency swaps, options, futures,
etc. Let us study about some of these items in detail.
7.3.1 Guarantees
Bank guarantee is one of the facilities that banks extend to their customers. A contract of
guarantee is a contract to perform the promise or discharge the liability of a third person in
case of his default. There are three persons in a contract of guarantee; the person giving the
guarantee is called the Guarantor or Surety, the person on whose behalf the guarantee is given
is called the Principal Debtor and the person in favour of whom the guarantee is given is
called the Creditor or Beneficiary.
The issuance of guarantee does not result in outlay of funds. The Bank's liability arises only
when the customer fails to perform the act for which the guarantee has been issued and the
bank is required to part with any money to the beneficiary of the guarantee. This is the main
reason for guarantee limits being classified as non-fund based limits. The guarantees are
classified as contingent liability.
Guarantees can be broadly classified as:
(a) Performance Guarantees; (b) Financial Guarantees;
(c) Deferred Payment Guarantees.
Performance Guarantees
These are guarantees issued in respect of performance of a contract or obligation. In the event
of non-performance or short performance of the obligations, the bank will be called upon to
make good the monetary loss arising out of the non-fulfilment of the guarantee obligation,
within the amount guaranteed. This is a guarantee confirming the performance competency of
the person, on whose behalf, the guarantee is issued. Liability is however reduced to money
terms.
The following guarantees can be treated as performance guarantees.
Guarantee in lieu of tender money/Earnest Money Deposit (EMD), guarantee in lieu of
security deposit and shipping guarantee.
Financial Guarantees
In certain contracts entered into by the bank customer with a government department/quasi-
government department/large companies, there is a provision for payment of certain amount
of money-in advance-against the bank guarantee to enable the customer to start the work
under the contract and begin performing the contracted job/work/project. The advance
enables the performance of the contract. The amount which is guaranteed (it is possible that
the guarantee may be less than the contact or a percentage of the contract amount) is made
available to the customer in advance and the guarantee terms, inter-alia, include that the
amount will be paid by the bank in case the customer does not fulfil the terms of the contract
within the period stated in the contract. In this case, the entire amount of money is received
by the customer and such guarantees are known as money guarantees.
The following are the examples of financial/money guarantee:
(a) Bank guarantee for supply of goods on credit basis,
(b) Guarantees in favour of customs authorities,
(c) Bank guarantees in favour of tax authorities.
Deferred Payment Guarantees
These guarantees normally arise in the case of purchase of machinery or such other capital
equipment by customers (from suppliers in India or outside). The manufacturer of the
machinery supplies the machinery against a cash payment of say, 10 per cent or 15 per cent
and gets accepted bills for the balance amount by the purchaser's bank or alternatively, for the
balance amount, the seller of the machinery gets guarantees issued. Such guarantees are
known as Deferred Payment Guarantees.
7.3.2 Letter of Credit
A letter of credit may be explained as an undertaking given by the buyer's bank on behalf of
the buyer to the seller, stipulating that if specified documents are presented within a stipulated
date, the bank establishing the credit will pay the amount of the bill drawn in terms of such
LC.
Parties to a Letter of Credit
A letter of credit has essentially the following parties to if. Buyer: Also known as purchaser
or one who applies for an LC.
Opening Branch/Bank: The branch/bank, which opens an LC and adds its credit standing to
that of the buyer.
Seller: Is also known as the shipper and is the beneficiary under the credit.
Negotiating Branch or Bank: Is a branch/bank other than the opening branch or another bank
at which the beneficiary may negotiate the drafts drawn under an LC.
Types of Credit
Irrevocable - Without Recourse Letter of Credit: This type of LC cannot be cancelled by the
buyer on whose behalf it is opened or be revoked by the bank, which has opened it without
the consent of the beneficiary/seller. Once a credit of the above type is opened and the
beneficiary is advised, the drafts drawn under the credit, together with documents thereunder,
if found to be in conformity with the terms of the credit, will have to be paid by the opening
bank. As this is a 'without recourse'LC , when once such bills are paid, no recourse can be had
against the beneficiary.
1. Revocable - Without Recourse Letter of Credit: These are not legally binding
undertakings between banks and beneficiaries. Such credits may be modified or cancelled at
any moment without notice to the beneficiary. Bill/bills paid, negotiated or accepted by the
negotiating branch/bank, prior to the receipt of cancellation or modification of such credit
will have to be honoured by the opening branch/bank. This type of credit is not normally in
use nowadays.
2. Revolving Letter of Credit: A revolving letter of credit is one which also provides that
the amount of drawing stipulated in it will be available to the beneficiary again and again, as
may be agreed between the buyer and the seller, within a stipulated period. Provision can also
be made in this to control the frequency of the drawing and limit the total extent that could be
thus drawn within the due date.
However, banks insist that a protective clause, normally known as reinstatement clause is
incorporated in revolving LC.
7.3.3 Forward Exchange Contract
A forward exchange contract is a firm contract between the bank and its customers for the
purchase / sale of a specified quantity of a stated foreign currency at a pre-determined
exchange rate. On the due date when the contract is executed, the transaction will be put
through at the contracted rate of exchange, irrespective of the spot rate then prevailing.
Forward exchange contract is a method of protecting oneself against exchange rate
fluctuations. Foreign exchange contracts are the most common means of hedging transactions
in foreign currencies.
7.3.4 Forward Rate Agreement (FRA) and interest Rate Swap (IRS)
Forward Rate Agreement (FRA) and Interest Rate Swap (IRS) are such instruments that can
provide effective hedge against interest rate risks. An FRA or an IRS provides means for
hedging the interest rate risk arising on account of lendings or borrowings made at
fixed/variable interest rates.
An FRA is a financial contract between two parties to exchange interest payments for a
'notional principal' amount on the settlement date for a specified period from start date to
maturity date. Accordingly, on the settlement date, cash payments based on contract (fixed)
and the settlement rate are made by the parties to one another. The settlement rate is the
agreed benchmark/reference rate prevailing on the settlement date.
An IRS is a financial contract between two parties exchanging or swapping a stream of
interest payments for a 'notional principal' amount on multiple occasions during a specified
period. Such contracts generally involve exchange of 'fixed to floating' or 'floating to floating'
rates of interest. Accordingly, on each payment date - that occurs during the swap period -
cash payments based on fixed/floating and floating rates are made by the parties to one
another.
7.4 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS
1. Factoring service means:
(a) Collection of bills (b) Discounting of bills
(c) Maintenance of account books (d) All of the above.
2. The type of arrangement under which a bank pays the seller the value of the bill and
later collects it from the buyer on the due date is called:
(a) Bill discounting (b) Factoring
(c) Forfeiting (d) None.
3. The type of factoring under which the factor collects back from the seller the amount
paid by him in case of non-payment of the bills on the due date is called:
(a) Recourse factoring(b) Non-recourse factoring
(c) Bills discounting (d) Bills purchased.
4.Under domestic factoring, the payment of the bills that the seller gets from the factor is:
(a)100 per cent of the value of the bills immediately on submission.
(b) nearly 80 per cent of the bill amount upon tendering the bill and the balance on due date.
(c)nearly 80 per cent of the bill amount upon tendering the bill and the balance on due date
after collecting it from the buyer.
(d)100 per cent of the value of the bill only after collection from the buyer.
5. In international factoring, the number of factors will be:
(a) 2 (b) 1
(c) 1 (d) more than 2
6. Forfaiting provides finance against the export receivables to an exporter:
(a) with recourse to the exporter (b) without recourse to the exporter
(c) both (d) either one
7. Forfaiter is:
(a) an intermediary between an exporter and importer
(b) an exporter (c) an importer
(d) a bank.
8. Forfaiting provides to the exporter against receivables:
(a) 100 per cent financing
(b) 80 per cent financing
(c) depending on the contract with the forfaiter
(d) none.
9. Forfaiting enables the exporter to avoid the following risks:
(a) interest-rate risk (b) currency risk
(c) credit risk and political risk (d) all.
10. Bank Guarantees are issued by:
(a) any bank
(b) only specified banks
(c) only banks permitted to do this type of business
(d) none.
11. In a bank guarantee, the number of parties involved in the agreement are:
(a) three (b) two
(c) many (d) one.
12. Letter of Credit is defined in the:
(a) Indian Contract Act (b) Negotiable Instruments Act
(c) Transfer of Property Act (d) None.
13.A revolving Letter of Credit is one which provides that the amount of drawing stipulated
in it will be available to the beneficiary:again and again as may be agreed between the buyer
and the seller within a stipulated period.
(a) Any number of times
(b) Only one once
(c) None
14. A forward exchange contract is a firm contract for the purchase/sale of a specified
quantity of a stated foreign currency at a pre-determined exchange rate between the bank and
its:
(a) exporters (b) importers
(c) both (d) none
7.5 ANSWERS TO CHECK YOUR PROGRESS'
1. (d), 2. (a), 3. (a), 4. (c), 5. (a), 6. (b), 7. (a), 8. (a), 9. (d), 10. (a), 11. (a), 12. (d), 13. (a), 14.
(c).
7.6 KEYWORDS Factoring, Forfaiting, Guarantees, Letter of Credit, Forward contracts,
Forward Rate Agreements, Interest Rate Swaps.
UNIT
8
RISK MANAGEMENT AND BASEL II
An Overview
STRUCTURE
8.0 Objectives
8.1 Introduction - Risk Management
8.1.1 Risk Management Function
8.1.2 Risk Management Structure
8.1.3 Loan Review Mechanism (LRM)
8.1.4 Credit Risk
8.1.5 Market Risk
8.1.6 Operational Risk
8.2 Introduction - Basel II
8.2.1 Basel I Accord
8.2.2 Basel II Accord
8.2.3 The Second Pillar - Supervisory Review Process
8.2.4 The Third Pillar - Market Discipline
8.3 Check Your Progress
8.4 Answers to 'Check Your Progress'
8.5 Keywords
70
8.0 OBJECTIVES
An in-depth study of this unit should make you understand:
• the various types of risks faced by a bank and their effective management, and
• the nuances of Basel II in strengthening of the banking system.
8.1 INTRODUCTION - RISK MANAGEMENT
Banks, in the process of financial intermediation, are confronted with various kinds of
financial and non-financial risks, viz., credit risk, interest rate risk, foreign exchange rate risk,
liquidity risk, equity price risk, commodity price risk, legal risk, regulatory risk, reputation
risk, operational risk, etc. These risks are highly independent/interdependent events that
affect the bank/financial institution. One area of risk can have ramifications for a range of
other risk categories. In view of this, banks are required to identify, measure, monitor and
control the overall level of risks undertaken by them.
8.1.1 Risk Management Function
The broad parameters of risk management function should cover:
(a) Organisational structure
(b) Comprehensive risk measurement approach
(c) Risk management policies approved by the board, which should be consistent with the
broader
business strategies, capital strength, management expertise and overall willingness to assume
risk
(d) Guidelines and other parameters used to govern risk taking, including detailed
structure of prudential
limits
(e) Strong MIS for reporting, monitoring and controlling risks
(f) Well laid out procedures, effective control and comprehensive risk reporting
framework
(g) Separate risk management organisation/framework independent of operational
departments and with clear delineation of levels of responsibility for management of risk
(h) Periodical review and evaluation.
8.1.2 Risk Management Structure
Each bank should set risk limits after assessing its risks and the risk-bearing capacity. At
organisational level, the task of overall risk management is assigned to an independent Risk
Management Committee. The purpose of this top level committee is to empower one group
with full responsibility of evaluating overall risks faced by the bank and determining the level
of risks which will be in the best interest of the bank. The functions of Risk Management
Committee are essentially to identify, monitor and measure the risk profile of the bank. The
committee also develops policies and procedures, verifies the models that are used for pricing
complex products, reviews the risk models as development takes place in the markets and
also identifies new risks.
8.1.3 Loan Review Mechanism (LRM)
It is an effective tool for constant evaluation of the quality of loan book and for bringing
about qualitative improvements in credit administration. Banks have, therefore, used Loan
Review Mechanism (LRM) for large value accounts with responsibilities assigned in various
areas such as, evaluating the effectiveness of loan administration, maintaining the integrity of
credit grading process, assessing the loan loss provision, portfolio quality, etc. The main
objectives of LRM could be to:
(a) promptly identify loans which develop credit weaknesses and initiate timely
corrective action,
(b) evaluate portfolio quality and isolate potential problem areas,
(cj provide information for determining adequacy of loan loss provision,
1
(d) assess the adequacy of and adherence to loan policies and procedures, and to monitor
compliance
with relevant laws and regulations,
(e) provide top management with information on credit administration, including credit
sanction process,
risk evaluation and post-sanction follow-up.
Accurate and timely credit grading is one of the basic components of an effective LRM.
Credit grading involves assessment of credit quality, identification of problem loans, and
assignment of risk ratings. A proper Credit Grading System should support evaluating the
portfolio quality and establishing loan loss provisions.
8.1.4 Credit Risk
Credit risk is defined as the possibility of losses associated with diminution in the credit
quality of borrowers or counterparties. In a bank's portfolio, losses stem from outright default
due to inability or unwillingness of a customer or counterparty to meet commitments in
relation to lending, trading, settlement and other financial transactions. Alternatively, losses
result from reduction in portfolio value arising from actual or perceived deterioration in credit
quality. Credit risk emanates from a bank's dealings with an individual, corporate, bank,
financial institution or a sovereign.
Credit risk may take the following forms:
(a) Direct lending: Principal and/or interest amount may not be repaid.
(b) Guarantees or letters of credit: Funds may not be forthcoming from the constituents
upon
crystallisation of the liability.
(c) Treasury operations: The payment or series of payments due from the counter parties
under the
respective contracts may not be forthcoming or ceases.
(d) Securities trading businesses: Funds/securities settlement may not be effected.
(e) Cross-border exposure: The availability and free transfer of foreign currency funds
may either cease or restrictions may be imposed by the sovereign.
In this backdrop, it is imperative that banks have a robust credit risk management system
which is sensitive and responsive to these factors. The effective management of credit risk is
a critical component of comprehensive risk management and is essential for the long-term
success of any banking organisation. Credit risk management encompasses identification,
Measurement, monitoring and control of the credit risk exposures.
8.1.5 Market Risk
Traditionally, credit risk management was the primary challenge for banks. With progressive
deregulation, market risk arising from adverse changes in market variables, such as interest
rate, foreign exchange rate, equity price and commodity price has become relatively more
important. Even a small change in market variables causes substantial changes in income and
economic value of banks. Market risk takes the form of:
(a) Liquidity risk (b) Interest rate risk
(c) Foreign exchange rate (forex) risk (d) Commodity price risk
(e) Equity price risk
8.1.6 Operational Risk
Managing operational risk is becoming an important feature of sound risk management
practices in modern financial markets in the wake of phenomenal increase in the volume of
transactions, high degree of structural changes and complex support systems. The most
important type of operational risk involves breakdowns in internal controls and corporate
governance. Such breakdowns can lead to financial loss through error, fraud, or failure to
perform in a timely manner or cause the interest of the
72
Generally, operational risk is defined as any risk, which is not categorised as market or credit
risk or the risk of loss arising from various types of human or technical error. It is also
synonymous with settlement or payments risk and business interruption, administrative and
legal risks. Operational risk has some form of link between credit and market risks. An
operational problem with a business transaction could trigger a credit or market risk.
8.2 INTRODUCTION - BASEL II
The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) is a committee of banking
supervisory authorities that was established by the central bank governors of a group of ten
countries in 1985. It consists of senior representatives of bank supervisory authorities and
central banks from Belgium, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, the
Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and the United States of
America. It usually meets at the Bank for International Settlements in Basel, where its
permanent secretariat is located.
8.2.1 Basel I Accord
The BCBS first came out with 1988 Capital Accord for banks, taking into account the
elements of risk in various types of assets in the balance sheet as well as off-balance sheet
business. Essentially, under the above system, the balance sheet assets, non-funded items and
other off-balance sheet exposures are assigned weights according to the prescribed risk
weights and banks have to maintain unimpaired minimum capital funds equivalent to the
prescribed ratio, on the aggregate of the risk weighted assets and other exposures, on an
ongoing basis. Under the Basel I Accord, only the credit risk element was considered and the
minimum requirement of capital funds was fixed at 8 per cent of the total risk weighted
assets. Risk adjusted assets would mean weighted aggregate of funded and non-funded items.
Degrees of credit risk expressed as percentage weightings have been assigned to balance
sheet assets and conversion factors to off-balance sheet items.
In India, however, banks are required to maintain a minimum Capital-To-Risk-Weighted
Asset Ratio (CRAR) of 9 per cent on an ongoing basis.
The banks' overall minimum capital requirement will be the sum of the following:
(a) capital requirement for credit risk on all credit exposures excluding items comprising
trading book
and including counterparty credit risk on all OTC derivatives on the basis of the risk weights;
and
(b) capital requirement for market risks in the trading book.
The value of each asset/item shall be multiplied by the relevant weights to produce risk
adjusted values of assets and off-balance sheet items. The aggregate will be taken into
account for reckoning the minimum capital ratio.
8.2.2 Basel II Accord
BCBS brought out a report titled 'International Convergence of Capital Measurement and
Capital Standards - A Revised Framework 2004' (also commonly called Basel Report II). The
report presents the outcome of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision's work over
recent years to secure international convergence on revisions to supervisory regulations
governing the capital adequacy of internationally active banks. Following the publication of
the committee's first round of proposals for revising the capital adequacy framework in June
1999, many valuable improvements have been made to the original proposals. The report sets
out the details of the agreed framework for measuring capital adequacy and the minimum
standard to be achieved which the national supervisory authorities represented on the
committee will propose for adoption in their respective countries. The committee expects its
members to move forward with the appropriate adoption procedures in their respective
countries and these, therefore, will be available for implementation by the end of the year
2008.
73
The fundamental objective of the committee's work towards revision of the 1988 accord has
been to develop a framework that would further strengthen the soundness and stability of the
international banking system while maintaining sufficient consistency that capital adequacy
regulation will not be a significant source of competitive inequality among internationally
active banks. The committee believes that the revised framework will promote the adoption
of stronger risk management practices by the banking industry and views this as one of its
major benefits.
In developing the revised framework, the committee has sought to arrive at significantly more
risk-sensitive capital requirements that are conceptually sound and at the same time pay due
regard to particular features of the present supervisory and accounting systems in individual
member countries. The committee is also retaining key elements of the 1988 capital adequacy
framework, including the general requirement for banks to hold total capital equivalent to at
least 8 per cent of their risk-weighted assets; the basic structure of the 1996 Market Risk
Amendment regarding the treatment of market risk; and the definition of eligible capital.
A significant innovation of the revised framework is the greater use of assessments of risk
provided by banks' internal systems as inputs to capital calculations.
The revised framework is more risk sensitive than the 1988 Accord, but countries where risks
in the local banking market are relatively high, nonetheless need to consider if banks should
be required to hold additional capital over and above the Basel minimum. This is particularly
the case with the more broad brush standardised approach. Even in the case of the internal
ratings-based (IRB) approach, however, the risk of major loss events may be higher than is
normally allowed for in this framework.
Three Pillars of Basel II
The Basel Committee's revised framework is based on the following three pillars:
The First Pillar: Minimum capital requirements
(a) Calculation of minimum capital requirements and constituents of capital
(b) Credit Risk
- Standardised Approach
- Internal Ratings-based Approach
- Securitisation Framework
(c) Operational Risk
(d) Market Risk.
The Second Pillar: Supervisory review process.
The Third Pillar: Market discipline.
The committee has also highlighted the need for banks and supervisors to give appropriate
attention to the second (supervisory review) and third (market discipline) pillars of the
revised framework. It is critical that the minimum capital requirements of the first pillar be
accompanied by a robust implementation of the second, including efforts by banks to assess
their capital adequacy and by supervisors to review such assessments. In addition, the
disclosures provided under the third pillar of this framework will be essential in ensuring that
market discipline is an effective complement to the other two pillars.
The First Pillar - Minimum Capital Requirements
The capital base of the bank consists of the following three types of capital elements: Tier 1,
Tier 2, and Tier 3 capital. The sum of Tier 1, Tier 2, and Tier 3 elements will be eligible for
inclusion in the capital base, subject to the following limits:
74
(a) The total of Tier 2 (supplementary) elements will be limited to a maximum of 100 per
cent of the
total of Tier 1 elements.
(b) Subordinated term debt will be limited to a maximum of 50 per cent of Tier 1
elements.
(c) Tier 3 capital will be limited to 250 per cent of a bank's Tier 1 capital that is required
to support
market risks.
(d) Where general provisions/general loan-loss reserves include amounts reflecting lower
valuations
(e) of asset or latent but unidentified losses present in the balance sheet, the amount of
such
(f) provisions
or reserves will be limited to a maximum of 1.25 percentage points.
(g) Asset revaluation reserves, which take the form of latent gains on unrealised
securities, will be
subject to a discount of 55 per cent.
Definition of Capital Elements
(i) Tier 1: Includes only permanent shareholders' equity (issued and fully paid ordinary
shares/ common stock and perpetual non-cumulative preference shares) and disclosed
reserves (created or increased by appropriations of retained earnings or other surplus, e.g.:
share premiums, retained profit, general reserves and legal reserves).
(ii) Tier 2:
(a) Undisclosed reserves are eligible for inclusion within supplementary elements,
provided these
reserves are accepted by the supervisor. Such reserves consist of that part of the accumulated
after-tax surplus of retained profits, which banks in some countries may be permitted to
maintain as an undisclosed reserve. Apart from the fact that the reserve is not identified in the
published balance sheet, it should have the same high quality and character as a disclosed
capital reserve. As such, it should not be encumbered by any provision or other known
liability,
but should be freely and immediately available to meet unforeseen future losses. This
definition
of undisclosed reserves excludes hidden values arising from holdings of securities in the
balance sheet that are below current market prices.
(b) Revaluation reserves are included in Tier 2, and could arise in two ways. First, in
some
countries, banks (and other commercial companies) are permitted to revalue fixed assets,
normally their own premises, from time to time in line with the change in market values. In
some of these countries, the amount of such revaluations is determined by law. Revaluations
of this kind are reflected on the face of the balance sheet as a revaluation reserve. Second,
hidden values of 'latent' revaluation reserves may be present as a result of long-term holdings
of equity securities valued in the balance sheet at the historic cost of acquisition. Both types
of revaluation reserves may be included in Tier 2, provided that the assets are prudently
valued, fully reflecting the possibility of price fluctuation and forced sale. In the case of
'latent' revaluation reserves, a discount of 55 per cent will be applied to the difference
between
historic cost book value and market value to reflect the potential volatility of this form of
unrealised capital and the notional tax charge on it.
(c) General provisions/general loan - loss reserves (for banks using the standardised
approach
for credit risk): These are provisions or loan-loss reserves held against the future. Presently,
unidentified losses are freely available to meet losses, which subsequently materialise and,
therefore, qualify for inclusion within supplementary elements. Provisions ascribed to
identified
deterioration of particular assets or known liabilities, whether individual or grouped should
be excluded. Furthermore, general provisions/general loan-loss reserves, eligible for inclusion
in Tier 2, will be limited to a maximum of 1.25 percentage points of weighted risk assets.
(d) Hybrid (debt/equity) capital instruments: This includes a range of instruments which
combine
characteristics of equity capital and of debt. Their precise specifications differ from country
to country, but they should meet the following requirements:
75
(i) Unsecured, subordinated and fully paid-up (ii) Not redeemable at the initiative of the
holder or without the prior consent sf the
supervisory authority; (iii) Available to participate in losses without the bank being obliged to
cease trading
(unlike conventional subordinated debt);
(iv) Although the capital instrument may carry an obligation to pay interest that cannot
permanently be reduced or waived (unlike dividends on ordinary shareholders' equity), it
should allow service obligations to be deferred (as with cumulative preference shares), where
the profitability of the bank would not support payment.
Cumulative preference shares, having these characteristics, would be eligible for inclusion in
this category.
(e) Subordinated term debt: Includes conventional, unsecured, subordinated debt capital
instruments, with a minimum original fixed term to maturity of over five years and limited
life redeemable preference shares. During the last five years to maturity, a cumulative
discount (or amortisation) factor of 20 per cent per year will be applied to reflect the
diminishing value of these instruments as a continuing source of strength. Unlike the hybrid
debt instruments, these instruments are not normally available to participate in the losses of a
bank that continues trading. For this reason, these instruments will be limited to a maximum
of 50 per cent of Tier 1.
(iii) Tier 3: Short-Term Subordinated Debt Covering Market Risk: The principal form of
eligible capital to cover market risks consists of shareholders' equity and retained earnings
(Tier 1 capital) and supplementary capital (Tier 2 capital) as defined in the above paragraphs.
But banks may also, at the discretion of their national authority, employ a third tier of capital
(Tier 3), consisting of short-term subordinated debt for the sole purpose of meeting a
proportion of the capital requirements for market risks, which is subject to the following
conditions:
(a) Banks will be entitled to use Tier 3 capital solely to support market risks.
(b) Tier 3 capital will be limited to 250 per cent of a bank's Tier 1 capital that is required
to
support market risks. This means that a minimum of about 28.5 per cent of market risks needs
to be supported by Tier 1 capital that is not required to support risks in the remainder of the
book. Tier 2 elements may be substituted for Tier 3 up to the same limit of 250 per cent
insofar as the overall limits are not breached, that is to say the eligible Tier 2 capital may not
exceed the total Tier 1 capital, and long-term subordinated debt may not exceed 50 per cent
of Tier 1 capital.
(c) The national authorities will have the discretion to refuse the use of short-term
subordinated
debt for individual banks or for their banking systems generally. In addition, it is a matter for
national discretion, whether or not to apply the principle in the present framework that Tier 1
capital should represent at least half of the total eligible capital, i.e. that the sum of the total
of
Tier 2 and Tier 3 capital should not exceed the total of Tier 1 capital.
For short-term subordinated debt to be eligible as Tier 3 capital, it needs, if circumstances
demand, to be capable of becoming part of a bank's permanent capital and thus be available
to absorb losses in the event of insolvency. It must, therefore, at a minimum:
(a) be unsecured, subordinated and fully paid-up;
(b) have an original maturity of at least two years;
(c) not be repayable before the agreed repayment date unless the supervisory authority
agrees;
(d) be subject to a lock-in clause, which stipulates that neither interest nor principal may
be paid (even at maturity), if such payment means that the bank falls below or remains below
its minimum capital requirement.
76
Deductions from the Capital Base
From Tier 1: Goodwill and increase in equity capital, resulting from a securitisation exposure,
will be deducted.
The following elements will be deducted 50 per cent from Tier 1 and 50 per cent from Tier 2
capitals:
(a) Investments in unconsolidated banking and financial subsidiary companies.
N.B.: The presumption is that this framework would be applied on a consolidated basis to
banking groups.
(b) Investments in the capital of other banks and financial institutions (at the discretion of
national
authorities).
(c) Significant minority investments in other financial entities. Where no deduction is
applied, banks'
holdings of other banks' capital instruments will bear a weight of 100 per cent.
8.2.3 The Second Pillar - Supervisory Review Process
This section discusses the key principles of supervisory review, risk management guidance
and supervisory transparency and accountability, produced by the committee with respect to
banking risks. This includes guidance relating to, among other things, the treatment of
interest rate risk in the banking book, credit risk (stress testing, definition of default, residual
risk and credit concentration risk), operational risk, enhanced cross-border communication
and cooperation and securitisation.
importance of Supervisory Review
The supervisory review process of the framework is intended not only to ensure that banks
have adequate capital to support all the risks in their business, but also to encourage banks to
develop and use better risk management techniques in monitoring and managing their risks.
The supervisory review process recognises the responsibility of bank management in
developing an internal capital assessment process and setting capital targets that are
commensurate with the bank's risk profile and control environment. In the framework, bank
management continues to bear the responsibility for ensuring that the bank has adequate
capital to support its risks beyond the core minimum requirements.
Supervisors are expected to evaluate how well banks are assessing their capital needs relative
to their risks and to intervene, where appropriate. This interaction is intended to foster an
active dialogue between banks and supervisors such that when deficiencies are identified,
prompt and decisive action can be taken to reduce risk or restore capital. Accordingly,
supervisors may wish to adopt an approach to focus more intensely on those banks with risk
profiles or operational experience that warrants such attention.
The committee recognises the relationship that exists between the amount of capital held by
the bank against its risks and the strength and effectiveness of the bank's risk management
and internal control processes. Increased capital should however not be viewed as the only
option for addressing increased risks confronting the bank. Other means for addressing risk,
such as strengthening risk management, applying internal limits, strengthening the level of
provisions and reserves and improving internal controls, must also be considered.
Furthermore, capital should not be regarded as a substitute for addressing fundamentally
inadequate control or risk management processes.
There are three main areas that might be particularly suited to treatment under Pillar 2. These
are: risks considered under Pillar 1 that are not fully captured by the Pillar 1 process (e.g.
credit concentration risk); factors that are not taken into account by the Pillar 1 process (e.g.
Interest rate risk in the banking book, business and strategic risk); and factors external to the
bank (e.g. business cycle effects). Another important aspect of Pillar 2 is the assessment of
compliance with the minimum standards and disclosure
77
requirements of the more advanced methods in Pillar 1, in particular the IRB framework for
credit risk and the advanced measurement approaches for operational risk. Supervisors must
ensure that these requirements are being met, both as qualifying criteria and on a continuing
basis.
Four Key Principles of Supervisory Review
The committee has identified four key principles of supervisory review, which complement
those outlined in the extensive supervisory guidance that has been developed by the
committee. The keystone of which is the core principles for effective banking supervision and
the core principles methodology. A list of the specific guidance relating to the management of
banking risks is also provided by the committee.
Principle 1: Banks should have a process for assessing their overall capital adequacy in
relation to their risk profile and a strategy for maintaining their capital levels.
Principle 2: Supervisors should review and evaluate banks' internal capital adequacy
assessments and strategies, as well as their ability to monitor and ensure their compliance
with regulatory capital ratios. Supervisors should take appropriate supervisory action if they
are not satisfied with the result of this process.
Principle 3: Supervisors should expect banks to operate above the minimum regulatory
capital ratios and should have the ability to require banks to hold capital in excess of the
minimum.
Principle 4: Supervisors should seek to intervene at an early stage to prevent capital from
falling below the minimum levels required to support the risk characteristics of a particular
bank and should require rapid remedial action if capital is not maintained or restored.
Specific Issues to be Addressed Under the Supervisory Review Process
The committee has identified a number of important issues that banks and supervisors should
particularly focus on while carrying out the supervisory review process. These issues include
some key risks which are not directly addressed under Pillar 1 and important assessments that
supervisors should make to ensure the proper functioning of certain aspects of Pillar 1.
8.2.4 The Third Pillar - Market Discipline Disclosure Requirements
The committee believes that the rationale for Pillar 3 is sufficiently strong to warrant the
introduction of disclosure requirements for banks using the framework. Supervisors have an
array of measures that they can use to require banks to make such disclosures. Some of these
disclosures will be the qualifying criteria for the use of particular methodologies or the
recognition of particular instruments and transactions.
Guiding Principles
The purpose of Pillar 3, market discipline is to complement the minimum capital
requirements (Pillar 1) and the supervisory review process (Pillar 2). The committee aims to
encourage market discipline by developing a set of disclosure requirements which will allow
market participants to assess key pieces of information on the scope of application, capital,
risk exposures, risk assessment processes, and hence, the capital adequacy of the institution.
The committee believes that such disclosures have particular relevance under the framework,
where reliance on internal methodologies gives banks more discretion in assessing capital
requirements.
In principle, banks' disclosures should be consistent with how senior management and the
Board of Directors assess and manage the risks of the bank. Under Pillar 1, banks use
specified approaches/ methodologies for measuring the various risks they face and the
resulting capital requirements. The
78
committee believes that providing disclosures, that are based on this common framework, is
an effective means of informing the market about a bank's exposure to those risks and
provides a consistent and understandable disclosure framework that enhances comparability.
Achieving Appropriate Disclosure
The committee is of the opinion that supervisors have different powers available to them to
achieve the disclosure requirements. Market discipline can contribute to a safe and sound
banking environment and supervisors require firms to operate in a safe and sound manner.
Under safety and soundness grounds, supervisors could require banks to disclose information.
Alternatively, supervisors have the authority to require banks to provide information in
regulatory reports. Some supervisors could make some or all the information in these reports
publicly available. Further, there are a number of existing mechanisms by which supervisors
may enforce requirements. These vary from country to country and range from 'moral
suasion' through dialogue with the bank's management (in order to change the latter's
behaviour), to reprimands or financial penalties. The nature of the exact measures used will
depend on the legal powers of the supervisor and the seriousness of the disclosure deficiency.
It is, however, not intended that direct additional capital requirements would be a response to
non-disclosure, except as indicated below:
In addition to the general intervention measures outlined above, this framework also
anticipates a role for specific measures. Where disclosure is a qualifying criterion under Pillar
1 to obtain lower risk weightings and/or to apply specific methodologies, there would be a
direct sanction (not being allowed to apply the lower weighting or the specific methodology).
8.3 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS
Choose the correct option:
A.I. One of the following forms may not result in credit risk:
(a) in the case of direct lending: principal and/or interest amount may not be repaid;
(b) in the case of guarantees or letters of credit: funds may not be forthcoming from the
constituents upon crystallisation of the liability;
(c) in the case of securities trading businesses: funds/securities settlement may not be
effected;
(d) none.
2. Operational risk is the risk of loss arising from various types of:
(a) human error
(b) failed systems and procedures in the bank
(c) breakdown in internal controls
(d) all of the above.
B.I. The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision is a committee of banking supervisory
authorities that was established by:
(a) the central bank governors of the Group of ten countries
(b) European countries
(c) India
(d) USA.
2. Under the Basel I Accord, BCBS fixed the minimum requirement of capital funds for
banks at:
(a) 8 per cent of the total risk weighted assets
(b) 9 per cent of the total risk weighted assets
(c) 10 per cent of the total risk weighted assets
(d) 1000 crore.
79
3. On how many pillars is the Basel I Framework based?
(a) 4 (b) 3
(c) 2 (d) 1
4. The risks considered for capital requirements under Basel II are:
(a) credit risk, market risk and operational risk
(b) credit risk, interest rate risk and foreign exchange risk
(c) credit risk, political risk and country risk
(d) None.
5. The first pillar under Basel II talks about:
(a) minimum capital requirements (b) supervisory review
(c) market discipline (d) disclosure norms
6. As per Basel II Framework, the total of Tier 2 capital is permitted up to a maximum
of:
(a) 100 per cent of Tier 1 capital
(b) 250 per cent of Tier 1 capital
(c) 80 per cent of Tier 1 capital
(d) 50 per cent of Tier 1 and Tier 3 capital
7. Tier I capital of a bank consists of its:
(a) paid-up equity capital
(b) issued and fully paid ordinary shares/common stock and perpetual non-cumulative
preference
shares and disclosed reserves
(c) authorised capital (d) none.
8. Subordinated term debt will be limited to a maximum of:
(a) 50 per cent of Tier 1 elements . (b) 100 per cent of Tier 1 elements
(c) 85 per cent of Tier 1 elements (d) none.
9. Tier 3 capital will be limited to:
(a) 250 per cent of a bank's Tier 1 capital that is required to support market risks
(b) 100 per cent of a bank's Tier 1 Capital
(c) 250 per cent of a bank's Tier 1 capital
(d) none.
8.4 ANSWERS TO 'CHECK YOUR PROGRESS'
. A. 1. (d), 2. (d).
B. 1. (a), 2. (a), 3. (b), 4. (a), 5. (a), 6. (a), 7. (b), 8. (a), 9. (a).8.5
KEYWORDS
Liquidity Risk, Interest Rate Risk, Foreign Exchange Rate (Forex) Risk, Commodity Price
Risk, Equity Price Risk, The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, Capital Funds, Credit
Risk, Operational Risk, Market Risk, Securitisation, Undisclosed Reserves, Risk-weighted
Assets.
UNIT
9
ALLIANCES/MERGERS/ CONSOLIDATION
STRUCTURE
9.0 Objectives
9.1 Alliances
9.1.1 Why Alliances?
9.1.2 Strategic Alliances - Benefits
9.2 Merger
9.2.1 Objectives
9.2.2 Types of Merger
9.2.3 Advantages
9.2.4 Disadvantages
9.3 Consolidation
9.4 Acquisition or Take-over
9.5 Consolidation in the Indian Banking Scenario
9.6 Check Your Progress
9.7 Answers to 'Check Your Progress'
9.8 Keywords
9.0 OBJECTIVES
This unit will enable you to:
• know the meaning of alliances, mergers and acquisitions and consolidation;
• study the objectives of merger/consolidation;
• know the advantages and disadvantages of alliances and mergers;
• study the progress and prospects of mergers and alliances in respect of the Indian
banking industry.
Before proceeding further, let us understand clearly the meaning of the terms like alliance,
merger, consolidation, take-over, acquisition, etc.
9.1 ALLIANCES
A strategic alliance is a formal and 'mutually agreed to' commercial collaboration between
companies. The partners pool, exchange, or integrate specific business resources for mutual
gain, yet they remain separate businesses. It is a synergistic arrangement whereby two or
more organisations agree to cooperate in the operation of a business activity, where each
involved company brings different strengths and capabilities to the arrangement. Alliances
can be either equity or non-equity based and typically start with one cooperative agreement
that evolves into a portfolio of arrangements built overtime.
9.1.1 Why Alliances?
Alliance contagious is an excellent vehicle to obtain market growth amid the rapidly
changing market conditions. Alliances can also help construct broader business systems by
linking a company's internal core competencies with the best of breed capabilities of its allies.
But not all alliances succeed. Almost one in two fails. 'Problematic alliances can be the result
of many factors, including industry dynamics, (for example, regulatory changes), new
technologies, new entrants or economic cycles'.
The ability to weather external forces as well as maximise internal alliance potential is
heavily driven by establishing a solid alliance foundation that includes experience, mutual
trust, strong relationships and sound business rational. Alliances that are managed well can
create tremendous value. Strategic alliances and collaborative approach, as an alternative to
mergers and acquisitions, could be attempted to reduce transaction costs through outsourcing,
leverage synergies in operations and thus avoid problems related to cultural integration. If
merger/consolidation is difficult to achieve, this alternative could be tried. Further, rapid
expansion in foreign markets without sufficient knowledge of local economic conditions
could increase vulnerability of individual banks and hence, a strategic alliance with a local
player could be a better solution.
One of the example of alliance is the coming together of three mid-size public sector banks -
Indian Bank, Corporation Bank and Oriental Bank of Commerce - which have entered into a
'strategic alliance' in October 2006. The alliance, intended to help the banks leverage their
combined balance sheet strength and share the benefits of economies of scale, is reflective of
the dynamics at play in the Indian banking space today. The present moves are: presupposing
the sharing of IT platform initially for ATMs, formation of a joint appraisal cell in Mumbai to
undertake appraisal of large projects for funding, participating in each other's training
programmes and building up a common data centre.
9.1.2 Strategic Alliances - Benefits
Strategic alliances bring enterprises the following benefits:
(a) Increase in capital for research and product development and yet lower risk
(Innovation)
(b) Decrease in product lead times and life cycles (time pressures)
(c) Ability to bring together complementary skills and assets that neither company could
easily develop on its own
(d) Access to knowledge and expertise beyond company borders (technology transfer)
(e) Rapidly achieve scale, critical mass and momentum (economies of scale - bigger is
better)
(f) Expansion of channel and international market presence (foreign market entry)
(g) Building credibility in the industry and brand awareness
(h) Providing added value to customers (value-addition)
(i) Establishing technological standards for the industry that will benefit the firm.
Strategic alliances come in all shapes and sizes, and include a wide range of cooperation,
from contractual to equity forms.
9.2 MERGER
Merger, also known as amalgamation, is defined as the combination of two or more
companies into a single company, where one survives with its name (or a combined new
name) and the others lose their corporate existence. According to the Oxford Dictionary,
'merger' means 'combining of two commercial companies into one' and 'amalgamation' means
'merging of two or more business concerns into one'. All the assets and liabilities (both on and
off balance sheet items) of the merging company gets transferred to the surviving company.
An example of this type of amalgamation in the Indian banking sector is the merger of Global
Trust Bank Ltd. with Oriental Bank of Commerce.
9.2.1 Objectives
Mergers are well recognised commercial practices for growth and diversification of
manufacturing, business and service activities. Following characteristics motivate mergers:
(a) diversify the areas of activities; achieve optimum size of business;
(b) remove certain key factors and other bottlenecks of input supplies;
(c) improve profitability;
(d) serve the customer better;
(e) achieve economies of scale and size, internal and external;
(f) acquire assets at lower than the market price;
(g) bring separate enterprises under single control;
(h) grow without any gestation period and nurse a sick unit and get tax advantages by
acquiring a running concern.
9.2.2 Types of Merger
There are four types of Mergers, viz., horizontal mergers, vertical mergers, concentric
mergers and conglomerate mergers. Horizontal Mergers normally involve the merger of two
or more companies which are producing similar products or rendering the same type of
services, i.e. products oj services which compete directly with each other. This type of merger
normally results in reduction in the number of players in that particular industry and may
reduce or eliminate competition. Vertical Mergers involve the merger of two companies,
where one of them is an actual or potential supplier of goods or services to the other. The
object of this kind of merger could be to ensure a source of supply or an outlet for products
and the effect may improve efficiency.
In Concentric or Congeneric Mergers, the two companies may be related through the basic
technologies, production process or markets. The merged company provides an extention of
product line, market participations or technology to the surviving company. Such mergers
provide greater opportunities to diversify into a relative market having higher return than it
enjoyed earlier. Conglomerate mergers neither constitute the bringing together of competitors
nor have a vertical connection. It involves a
predominant element of diversification of activities. Thus, in this kind of merger, one
company derives most of its revenue from a particular industry, acquiring companies
operating in other industries - with a view to obtain greater stability of earnings through
diversification or to obtain benefits of economies of scale, etc.
9.2.3 Advantages
(a) Brings in synergy in operations and economies of scale in inputs, production and
delivery, which
results in cost savings for the acquirer.
(b) Due to increased size, the growth in the top line (sales volume) and bottom line
(profit) are significant.
(c) Creates opportunities to penetrate markets - strategic benefits.
(d) Helps build a strong marketing front-end for increased customer comfort and to
leverage expertise
in markets.
(e) Enables to achieve world-class standards in their line of business.
(f) Facilitates product innovation as their resources are more so complementary.
9.2.4 Disadvantages
(a) Merger of two companies may result in dilution of competition in the market,
adversely affecting consumers' interests.
(b) May result in abuse of market power.
(c) Higher concentration arising out of consolidation could have larger potential for
systemic risk.
9.3 CONSOLIDATION
Consolidation is defined as the combining of two existing companies into a new company, in
which both the existing companies get extinguished and a new company is made or created.
The existing companies lose their identities and a new entity is created with a different or the
same name. The assets and liabilities of both the companies get merged into the new
company. In the Indian corporate history, we can cite the example of the Birla Group of
companies, 'Indian Rayon and Industries Ltd.' and 'Indo Gulf Industries Ltd.' consolidating to
give birth to the, now existing new company named 'Aditya Birla Nuvo Ltd.'
9.4 ACQUISITION OR TAKE-OVER
Acquisition or take-over of a company refers to the acquiring of a controlling stake in the
ownership of a company by another entity. This is normally done by one company buying
into the share capital of another company, either in a hostile manner or with the consent of the
existing owners.
9.5 CONSOLIDATION IN THE INDIAN BANKING SCENARIO
In the liberalised era, banks in India will have to be competitive in order to face the
challenges and leverage the opportunities. The ultimate goals of a bank are to increase its
market share, become more diversified, reduce the risk of entering a new business and
redefine the competitive edge through acquiring different streams of businesses.
Consolidation will provide banks with new capabilities, technologies and products, help to
overcome entry barriers, ensure immediate entry into new markets and lower operating costs
through consolidation of resources. The strategic factors for existing banks competing with
private and international players would be the size, quality of service and low cost finance by
achieving 'critical mass'. In contrast to the earlier experience of mergers being initiated by the
regulator to protect the interest of depositors of weak banks, the trend of market-led mergers
between private banks and private banks with public sector banks may gain momentum.
Consolidation may also take
place through strategic alliances or partnerships covering specific areas of business such as
Small- to Medium-Sized Enterprise (SME) lending, credit-cards and insurance.
Mergers in Indian banking are not new and dates back to 1921. In fact, in 1921, the three
presidency banks - the Bank of Bengal, the Bank of Bombay and the Bank of Madras were
amalgamated into the Imperial Bank of India, which is now called the State Bank of India.
Over the years many smaller banks have merged into bigger banks as in the case of New
Bank of India into Punjab National Bank, Bank of Tamil Nadu into Indian Bank, etc. In these
recent years several mergers have taken place in India but not necessarily for business
reasons but for bailing out some sick banks. Some of the recent ones are the merger of Global
Trust Bank Ltd. with Oriental Bank of India and the merger of United Western Bank with
1DBI. An example of market driven merger took place when the Times Bank was merged
with HDFC Bank and Bank of Madura was merged with ICICI Bank. Recently, a number of
Regional Rural Banks (RRBs) have been merged to bring about more viable business units
and to reduce redundancies in operation. The market has also witnessed mergers in the urban
co-operative landscape.
With the ongoing economic reforms and liberalisation accelerating further in the future and
with the enforcement of World Trade Organisation's (WTO's) General Agreement on Trade
and Tariff (GATT), Indian banks will face stiffer competition as large international banks
with varied market experience and financial muscle enter the Indian banking arena. The
presence of competitive and strong private and foreign banks will subject the other weaker
and fragmented banks to comparisons with regard to 'profitability' and 'efficiency' in
operations. This would force the weaker and smaller banks to go for consolidation or get
perished.
As of March 2008, India has about 89 commercial foreign, private and state-run banks and
several hundred co-operative banks. There are about ninety-six regional rural banks. The
State Bank of India and its seven associates have about 13,800 branches; the nineteen
nationalised banks about 33,500 branches, the RRBs have some 14,500 branches and foreign
banks around 215 branches. This level of fragmentation needs to be corrected so as to create
four to five 'right-size' banks; banks of the size of SBI, with world-class standards, which will
enable them to respond to the stimulus of global opportunities. Size enables banks to lend
large sums to select corporates, thereby ensuring a better quality asset book. Further,
significant overhead infrastructure is essential for a wide variety of retail products that are
demanded in today's customer-driven banking environment. Such large infrastructure can be
effectively sustained only by large sized banks. Continuous capital infusion is an essential
ingredient for growth in the banking industry. Larger banks have the ability to augment
capital at better valuations than smaller banks.
Raising capital from the financial market will help banks in consolidation without further
diluting the basic character of ownership and management and enable them to face global
competition. Stakeholders would benefit due to reduced intermediation costs and
consolidation is also likely to benefit employees in the banking system, since it would lead to
re-training and re-skilling of the work force.
It is apparent, therefore, that competition, consolidation and convergence are the key drivers
of the banking sector in India today. Basel II implementation is likely to accelerate the
emerging trends of consolidation to overcome capital constraint, streamline risk management,
maximise return on capital, better and more extensive use of technology for efficiency gains,
for more robust risk-based pricing and closer alignment with international best practices. The
Oriental Indian Corporation (OIC) alliance appears to be a step in this direction, aimed as it
is, at collaboration in such areas as IT, treasury resources and making a foray into
international capital markets, insurance and other financial services.
Future success of banks will depend upon a rigorously defined strategic focus, strengthening
operating capabilities and finding a way to grow profitably, either by extending geographical
coverage, expanding product/market coverage, going for mergers or acquisitions or a
combination of these.
9.6 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS
1. In case of Strategic Alliances,
(a) the partners will remain as separate entities
(b) the partners will lose their individual identities
(c) one partner will get merged with the other
(d) none
2. Three mid-sized public sector banks have entered into a 'strategic alliance' in October
2006.
They are:
(a) Indian Bank, Corporation Bank and Oriental Bank of Commerce
(b) Indian Bank, Punjab National Bank and Canara Bank
(c) Union Bank of India, Syndicate Bank and Corporation Bank
(d) Canara Bank, Syndicate Bank and Corporation Bank.
3. Combining of two or more companies into a single company where one survives with
its name
and the others lose their corporate existence is called:
(a) Merger (b) Alliance
(c) Consolidation (d) Acquisition.
4. In 1921, the three presidency banks - the Bank of Bengal, the Bank of Bombay and
the Bank of
Madras were amalgamated into one Bank which is now called the:
(a) State Bank of India (b) Reserve Bank of India
(c) Indian Bank (d) none.
9.7 ANSWERS TO 'CHECK YOUR PROGRESS'
1. (a), 2. (a), 3. (a), 4. (a).
9.8 KEYWORDS
Alliances, Mergers, Consolidation, Take-over, WTO.
CREDIT INFORMATION BUREAU (INDIA) LIMITED (CIBIL), FAIR PRACTICES
CODE FOR DEBT COLLECTION AND BANKING CODES AND STANDARDS BOARD
OF INDIA
STRUCTURE
10.0 Objectives
10.1 Credit Information Bureau (India) Limited (CIBIL)
10.1.1 Ownership Structure
10.1.2 Functions of CIBIL
10.2 Fair Practices Code for Debt Collection
10.2.1 Demand for Lenders' Liability Law
10.2.2 General Guidelines
10.2.3 Indian Banks' Association (IBA) Initiative
10.2.4 Banking Ombudsman Service
10.3 Banking Codes and Standards Board of India (BCSBI)
10.3.1 Introduction
10.3.2 Formation of Banking Codes and Standards Board of India (BCSBI)
10.3.3 Code of Bank's Commitment to Customers
10.3.4 Function of BCSBI
10.3.5 Grievance Redressal
10.4 Check Your Progress
10.5 Answers to 'Check Your Progress'
10.6 Keywords
10.0 OBJECTIVES
Reading this unit will enable you to understand:
• the role and importance of CIBIL
• the bankers' fair practices code for debt collection, and
• the role of BCSBI in banks' commitment to fair treatment to customers.
10.1 CREDIT INFORMATION BUREAU (INDIA) LIMITED (CIBIL)
10.1.1 Ownership Structure
CIBIL, India's first credit information bureau was established by SBI and HDFC, with a
shareholding of 40 per cent each, while Dun & Bradstreet Information Services India Private
Limited (D&B) and Trans Union International Inc. (TU) hold 10 per cent each. D&B and TU
have also provided the necessary technical and software support to CIBIL. CIBIL is a
repository of information, which contains the credit history of commercial and consumer
borrowers. CIBIL provides this information to its members in the form of credit information
reports (CIRs).
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI), in its 'Annual Monetary and Credit Policy' for the year
2004-05, had stated that in respect of credit bureaus, 'it is desirable that the objective should
be to move towards a sufficiently diversified ownership with no single entity owning more
than 10 per cent of the paid-up capital in the first stage and 5 per cent later.' Accordingly, SBI
and HDFC have divested their equity stake in favour of significant data providers with
representation from all the categories of credit grantors. As on 31 December, 2006, HDFC,
SBI, ICICI Bank, D&B and TU, hold 10 per cent stake each in CIBIL, whereas Citicorp
Finance (India) Ltd., Standard Chartered Bank, HSBC, Punjab National Bank, Bank of India,
Central Bank of India, Union Bank of India, Bank of Baroda and Indian Overseas Bank hold
5 per cent stake each, while the remaining 5 per cent is equally held by GE Strategic
Investments Ltd. and Sundaram Finance.
10.1.2 Functions of CIBIL
CIBIL is a composite credit bureau, which caters to both commercial and consumer
segments. The Consumer Credit Bureau covers credit availed by individuals while the
Commercial Credit Bureau covers credit availed by non-individuals such as partnership
firms, proprietary concerns, private and public limited companies, etc.
The aim of CIBIL's Commercial Credit Bureau is to minimise instances of concurrent and
serial defaults by providing credit information, pertaining to non-individual borrowers such
as public limited companies, private limited companies, partnership firms, proprietorships,
etc. CIBIL maintains a central database of information as received from its members. IT
collates and disseminates this information on demand to members in the form of commercial
Credit Information Reports (CIR) to assist them in their loan appraisal process.
10.2 FAIR PRACTICES CODE FOR DEBT COLLECTION
10.2.1 Demand for Lenders'Liability Law
The Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security
Interest Act was enacted in India in 2002. The Act allowed banks to take possession of assets
of defaulting companies without going through the cumbersome legal process. In many
countries, banks are mandated by law to respect the rights and interests of lenders, depositors
and the other customers. Hence, the Indian industry strongly pitched for a lenders' liability
law to prevent banks and FIs from misusing the securitisation law. The Government of India
rejected such a demand but asked RBI to look into the matter.
On the basis of the recommendations of the working group on Lenders' Liability Laws
constituted by the Government of India, Reserve Bank of India, in consultation with the
Government and some banks and financial institutions, finalised a set of codes called 'the Fair
Practices Code, for Lenders’and advised banks to adopt the guidelines. All the banks in India
have framed their own set of Fair Practices Codes as per the guidelines and implemented it
from November 1, 2003.
10.2.2 General Guidelines
Applications for Loans and their Processing
(a) Loan application forms in respect of priority sector and advances of up to Rs. 2.00 lakh
should be comprehensive. It should include information about the fees/charges, if any,
payable for processing. The amount of such fees is refundable in the case of non-acceptance
of application. A meaningful comparison with that of other banks can thus be made and the
informed decision can be taken by the borrower.
(b) Banks and financial institutions shall give acknowledgement for receipt of all loan
applications. The time frame, within which loan applications up to Rs. 2 lakh will be disposed
should also be indicated in acknowledgement of such applications.
(c) Banks/financial institutions should scrutinise the loan applications within a reasonable
period of time. If additional details/documents are required, they should intimate the
borrowers immediately.
(d) In the case of small borrowers seeking loans up to Rs. 2 lakh, the lenders should convey
in writing, the main reason/reasons which, in the opinion of the bank after due consideration,
have led to rejection of the loan applications within the stipulated time.
Loan Appraisal and Terms/Conditions
(a)Lenders should ensure that the credit proposal is properly appraised after assessing the
creditworthiness of the applicants. They should not use margin and security stipulation as a
substitute for due diligence on credit-worthiness.
(b)Terms and conditions and other caveats governing credit facilities are arrived at after due
negotiation with the borrower should be reduced in writing and duly certified by the
authorised official. A copy of the loan agreement along with a copy each of all enclosures
quoted in the loan agreement should be furnished to the borrower.
(c)The lender should convey to the borrower the sanction of credit limit along with the terms
and conditions thereof and keep the borrower's acceptance of these terms and conditions on
record.
(d)As far as possible, the loan agreement should clearly stipulate that the credit facilities
granted are solely at the discretion of the lenders. These may include approval or disallowing
facilities, such as, drawings beyond the sanctioned limits, honouring cheques issued for a
purpose other than the one specifically agreed to in the credit sanction and disallowing
drawing on a borrowal account on its classification as a non-performing asset or on account
of non-compliance with the terms of sanction. It may also be specifically stated that the
lender does not have an obligation to meet further requirements of the borrowers on account
of growth in business etc. without proper review of credit limits.
(e) In the case of lending under consortium arrangement, the participating lenders should
evolve procedures to complete appraisal of proposals in the time-bound manner to the extent
feasible and communicate their decisions on financing or otherwise within a reasonable time.
Disbursement of Loans including Changes in Terms and Conditions
Lenders should ensure timely disbursement of loans sanctioned in conformity with the terms
and conditions governing such sanction. Lenders should give notice of any change in the
terms and conditions including interest rates, service charges, etc. Lenders should also ensure
that changes in interest rates and charges are effected only prospectively.
Post-Disbursement Supervision
(a) Post-disbursement supervision by lenders, particularly in respect of loans up to Rs. 2
lakh, should
be constructive with a view to taking care of any 'lender-related' genuine difficulty that the
borrower
may face.
(b) Before taking a decision to recall/accelerate payment or performance under the
agreement or seeking
additional securities, lenders should give notice to borrowers, as specified in the loan
agreement or
a reasonable period, if no such condition exits in the loan agreement.
(c) Lenders should release all securities on receiving payment of loan or realisation of
loan, subject to
any legitimate right or lien for any other claim lenders may have against borrowers. If such
right is
to be exercised, borrowers shall be given notice about the same with full particulars about the
remaining claims and the documents under which lenders are entitled to retain the securities
till the
relevant claim is settled/paid.
General
(a) Lenders should restrain from interference in the affairs of the borrowers except for
what is provided
in the terms and conditions of the loan sanction documents (unless new information, not
earlier
disclosed by the borrower, has come to the notice of the lender).
(b) Lenders must not discriminate on grounds of gender, caste and religion in the matter
of lending.
This does not, however, preclude lenders from participating in credit-linked schemes framed
for
weaker sections of the society.
(c) In the matter of recovery of loans, the lenders should not resort to undue harassment,
viz., persistently
bothering the borrowers at odd hours, use of muscle power for recovery of loans etc.
(d) In case of receipt of request for transfer of borrowal account, either from the borrower
or from a
bank/financial institution, which proposes to takeover the account, the consent or otherwise,
i.e.
objection of the lender, if any, should be conveyed within twenty-one days from the date of
receipt
of request.
Apart from the Fair Practices Code, every bank has laid down appropriate grievance redressal
mechanisms within the organisation to resolve disputes arising in this regard. Such a
mechanism ensures that all disputes arising out of the decisions of the lending institutions'
functionaries are heard and disposed of at least at the next higher level. The banks also
conduct periodical review of the compliance of the Fair Practices Code and the functioning of
the grievances redressal mechanism at various levels of controlling offices. Banks have also
put on their website The Fair Practices Code, adopted by them and given wide publicity.
10.2.3 Indian Banks'Association (IBA) Initiative
The IBA had brought out its 'Bankers' Fair Practice' code in June 2004 and all member banks
had adopted it voluntarily. The code was essentially a commitment to be fair and transparent
in dealing with individual customers. The IBA had also separately come out with 'Fair
Practice Code for Credit Card Operations' and 'Model Code for Collection of Dues and
Repossession of Security' to address specific concerns voiced by customers about banking
practices in these areas. The Banking Codes and Standards Board of India (BCSBI) was set
up on 18 February, 2006. On the guidance of Reserve Bank of India, BCSBI had brought out
the 'Code of Bank's Commitment to Customers' to be followed by member banks. The code
sets minimum standards of banking practices for banks to follow when they deal with
individual customers. This code deals with, inter alia, fair practices code for collection of
debts.
10.2.4 Banking Ombudsman Service
The banks will display on their website and in all their branches, a notice explaining that it is
covered by the Banking Ombudsman Scheme, 2006 of the Reserve Bank of India and the
copies of the scheme will be made available on request at a nominal charge.
Within thirty days of lodging a complaint with a bank, if the customer does not get a
satisfactory response from it and the customer wishes to pursue other avenues for redressal of
grievances, he/she may approach the Banking Ombudsman appointed by the Reserve Bank of
India under Banking Ombudsman Scheme, 2006. Salient features of the Banking
Ombudsman Scheme are displayed in the branch notice boards and the scheme itself is
displayed on the bank's website. The bank's staff would explain the procedure in this regard.
10.3 BANKING CODES AND STANDARDS BOARD OF INDIA (BCSBI)
10.3.1 Introduction
In November 2003, RBI constituted the Committee on Procedures and Performance Audit of
Public Services under the Chairmanship of Shri S.S.Tarapore (former Deputy Governor) to
address the issues relating to availability of adequate banking services to the common man.
The mandate to the committee included identification of factors that inhibited the attainment
of best customer services and suggesting steps to improve the quality of banking services to
individual customers. The committee felt that in an effort to continuously upgrade the
package of services that banks offered to their customers, there was a need of benchmarking
of such services. After indepth study at the grass root level, the committee concluded that
there was an institutional gap for measuring the performance of banks against a benchmark,
reflecting the best practices (Code and Standards). Therefore, the committee recommended
setting up of the Banking Codes and Standards Board of India, broadly on the lines of
Banking Codes and Standards Board functioning in the UK.
Among the existing institutional structures, the Scheme of Banking Ombudsman, which has
been functioning for quite sometime, does not look into systemic issues with a view to
enforcing a prescribed quality of service. Ideally, such a function should be performed by a
Self Regulatory Organisation (SRO), but in view of the existing framework of the banking
sector in India, it was felt that an independent, autonomous board will be best suited for the
function. Therefore, RBI, in its Monetary Policy Statement (April 2005), announced setting
up of the Banking Codes and Standards Board of India in order to ensure that comprehensive
code of conduct for fair treatment of customers was evolved and adhered to.
10.3.2 Formation of Banking Codes and Standards Board of India (BCSBI)
The BCSBI has been registered as a separate society under the Societies Registration Act,
1860 on 18 February 2006. The BSCBI functions as an autonomous body, to monitor and
assess the compliance with codes and minimum standards of service to individual customers
to which the banks agreed to.
BSCBI is not a department of the RBI. It is an independent banking industry watch dog to
ensure that the consumer of banking services get what they are promised by the banks.
To ensure that the board really functions as an autonomous and independent watch dog of the
industry, the RBI has decided to extend financial support to the board by way of meeting its
full expenses for the first five years. This will enable the board to reach its economic critical
mass that will make it truly independent in its functioning and take a view on any bank
without its existence coming under any threat. On its part, RBI would derive supervisory
comfort in case of banks which are members of the board. In substance, the board has been
set up to ensure that the common man, as a consumer of financial services from the banking
Industry, is in no way at a disadvantageous position and really gets what he has been
promised.
The Role of IB A
The IBA had brought out its 'Bankers' Fair Practice' code in June 2004 and all member banks
had adopted it voluntarily. The code was essentially a commitment to be fair and transparent
in dealing with
individual customers. The IBA had also separately come out with 'Fair Practice Code for
Credit Card Operations' and 'Model Code for Collection of Dues and Repossession of
Security' to address specific concerns voiced by customers about banking practices in these
areas.
10.3.3 Code of Bank's Commitment to Customers
The Reserve Bank of India, while announcing the formation of the BCSBI in the Annual
Policy Statement, had requested the IBA to set up a working group to draft a comprehensive
fair practice code, covering all the areas of customer service for uniform adoption by banks.
Accordingly, the IBA had set up a working group to study the international practices and
review the existing codes. The working group had examined fair practice codes adopted by
bankers in other domains like UK, Canada, Hong Kong, Singapore and Australia and
prepared a draft Bankers' Fair Practice Code, duly incorporating some of the finer points from
those documents. The working group further refined the draft code, incorporating the
suggestions from the member banks and submitted it to the BCSBI. BCSBI had made further
refinements to the code and the 'Code of Bank's Commitment to Customers' was brought out.
The code sets minimum standards of banking practices for banks to follow when they deal
with individual customers.
The 'Code of Bank's Commitment to Customers' was released by Dr. Y.V. Reddy, Governor,
Reserve Bank of India, in an inaugural function held at RBI on 1 July, 2006.
Banks will be required to register themselves with BCSBI as members and have the Code
adopted by their respective boards. Thereafter, when they are ready to implement the
commitments contained in the Code, the banks will enter into a covenant with BCSBI,
binding them to monitoring by BCSBI as far as implementation of the code is concerned. The
banks would also be required to make necessary changes in certain policy and procedural
aspects around their products and services. With the adoption of 'Code of Bank's
Commitment to Customers' by member banks who are members of BCSBI, the following
voluntary codes of IBA would not be applicable to them:
(a) Bankers' Fair Practice Code - w.e.f. June 2004
(b) Fair Practice Code for Credit Card Operations
(c) Model Code for Collection of Dues and Repossession of Security
However, member banks who are not members of BCSBI or eligible to become members of
BCSBI would continue to follow these codes.
The code represents each member bank's commitment to minimum standards of service to
individual customers in relation to products and services offered by the bank, like:
• Deposit accounts
• Safe deposit lockers
• Settlement of accounts of deceased account holders
• Foreign exchange services
• Remittances within India
• Loans and advances and guarantees
• Credit cards
• Internet banking
In these areas the code, inter alia, dwells upon:
• Interest rates
• Tariff schedule
• Terms and conditions governing relationship between the bank and the customer
• Compensation for loss, if any, to the customer due the acts of omission or commission
on the part of the bank
• Privacy and confidentiality of the information relating to the customer
• Norms governing advertisements, marketing and sales by banks.
Every member bank is required to:
• Have a help desk/helpline at the branch
• Have a code compliance officer at each controlling office above the level of the
branch.
• Display, at each branch, name and contact number of the code compliance officer.
• Display name and address of the banking ombudsman.
This is to help the customer in case his bank does not provide services as promised in the
code.
10.3.4 Function of BCSBI
The main function of the board is to ensure adherence to the 'Code of Bank's Commitment to
Customers'. The code is voluntary and sets minimum standards of banking practices for banks
to follow when they are dealing with individual customers in their day-to-day operations. The
code is not only meant to provide protection to the individual customers but is also expected
to generate awareness in the common man about his rights as a consumer of banking services.
The common man is, therefore, the raison d'etre of the BCSBI.
10.3.5 Grievance Redressal
Member banks of BCSBI would put in place the following grievance redressal mechanism in
their banks:
• Have a help desk/helpline at the branch and display at each branch name and contact
number of code compliance officer and Display name and address of the banking
ombudsman
• Have a code compliance officer at each controlling office above the level of the
branch.
The customer should first approach the help desk of the branch/bank. In case the issue is not
resolved, the code compliance officer of the bank may be approached by the complainant. In
case the issue is still not resolved to the satisfaction of the customer, he should take it up with
the banking ombudsman.
The difference between the banking ombudsman and the banking codes and Standard Board
of India is that the banking ombudsman is a redressal mechanism to attend to disputes
between banks and its customer as also to attend to individual complaints relating to
deficiencies in banking services. On the other hand, the BCSBI is an industry watch dog to
oversee compliance with the 'Code of Bank's Commitment to Customers.' It is not a redressal
mechanism and will look into an individual complaint only to the extent it points to any
systemic failure in compliance with the code.
10.4 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS
1. One of the following does not own 10 per cent equity stake in the capital of CIBIL:
(a) HDFC (b)SBI
(c) ICICI Bank (d) Standard Chartered Bank
2. CIBIL as a credit bureau caters to:
(a) consumer segments
(b) commercial segments
(c) both commercial and consumer segments
(d) none.
3. The Consumer Credit Bureau covers credit availed by:
(a) individuals(b) proprietary concerns
(c) private and public limited companies (d) banks.
4. Credit information reports can be accessed by:
(a) only those members who have provided all their data to CIBIL
(b) by any bank
(c) by any Indian citizen
(d) none.
5. In case of receipt of request for transfer of borrowal account, the consent or objection
of the lender, if any, should be conveyed within:
(a) twenty-one days from the date of receipt of request
(b) fifteen days from the date of receipt of request
(c) immediately on receipt of request
(d) none.
6. The Banking Codes and Standards Board of India was registered on 18 February,
2006 under:
(a) RBI Act (b) Banking Regulation Act
(c) the Societies Registration Act, 1860 (d) none.
7. The 'Bankers' Fair Practice' code was brought out in June 2004 by:
(a) IBA (b) RBI
(c) Government of India (d) None.
10.5 ANSWERS TO 'CHECK YOUR PROGRESS'
1. (d), 2. (c), 3. (a), 4. (a), 5. (a), 6. (c), 7. (a).
10.6 KEYWORDS
Credit Information Reports, Code of Bank's Commitment to Customers, Post disbursement
supervision.
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS IN THE INDIAN FINANCIAL SYSTEM
STRUCTURE
11.0 Objectives
11.1 Structure of the Indian Financial System
11.2 Reforms to Strengthen the Financial System
11.3 Development of Money Market
11.3.1 Commercial Paper
11.4 Development of Government Securities Market
11.5 Development of Capital Market
11.6 Development of Forex Market
11.7 Regulatory Framework for the Indian Financial System
11.8 Check Your Progress
11.9 Answers to 'Check Your Progress'
11.10 Keywords
11.0 OBJECTIVES
By studying this unit, you will be able to understand the major segments of the Indian
Financial System and the latest developments in these sectors.
11.1 STRUCTURE OF THE INDIAN FINANCIAL SYSTEM
The money market, the government securities market, the capital market and the forex market
constitute the important segments of the financial system, besides the market for credit
involving banks, non-banks and all India financial institutions.
11.2 REFORMS TO STRENGTHEN THE FINANCIAL SYSTEM
Since the mid-1991, the Reserve Bank of India has taken several steps to develop various
segments of the financial markets, strengthen their integration and enhance their efficiency.
These steps essentially covered the money market, the government securities market and the
foreign exchange market. Steps were also undertaken by other regulators like SEBI and the
Government of India to develop other markets, especially the equity and the debt segments of
the capital market. Policy initiatives in these areas are related to introduction of new
instruments, institutions and practices. Efforts have been made to widen the participant base,
improve information base for all participants, create greater transparency and encourage good
market practices, introduce efficient settlement mechanisms, rationalise tax structures, create
better infrastructure to facilitate faster transactions and lower their costs.
11.3 DEVELOPMENT OF MONEY MARKET
Till the mid-1980s, the Indian money market was constrained by a paucity of instruments and
it was regulated heavily with regard to participants and interest rates. Pursuant to the
recommendations of the committee to review the working of the monetary system (Chairman:
Prof. Sukhamoy Chakravarty, 1985) and the working group on the money market (Chairman:
Shri N. Vaghul, 1988), a number of measures were taken up by the Reserve Bank of India to
widen and deepen the money market through institution building and instrument
development. The Discount and Finance House of India Ltd. (DFHI), set up jointly by the
Reserve Bank, public sector banks and financial institutions, commenced operations in April
1988, to deal in short-term money market instruments with the primary objective of
improving liquidity. The introduction of new instruments, broadening of participants' base
and strengthening of institutional infrastructure have been pursued during the 1990s, based on
the framework provided by the Vaghul Committee and the Narasimham Committee II.
After 2000-01, a number of structural and instrument-specific measures taken up by the
Reserve Bank of India have contributed to the growth and sophistication of Indian money
market. These include the introduction of Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF), which started
functioning from 5 June 2000. The introduction of Collateralised Borrowing and Lending
Obligation (CBLO) through the Clearing Corporation of India Limited (CCIL) from 20
January 2003 and the expansion of repo market outside the LAF have also provided an
avenue for bank and non-bank participants to trade funds after the conversion of call/money
market into a pure interbank market. In order to broaden the market, non-scheduled urban
cooperative banks and listed companies with gilt accounts with scheduled commercial banks
have also been allowed to participate in the repo market outside the Reserve Bank of India..
The technological infrastructure, particularly with the introduction of Negotiated Dealing
System (NDS), Real-Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) system and Centralised Funds
Management System (CFMS) has brought about responsibilities for Primary Dealers (PDs) to
support primary issuances, such as 100 percent
underwriting commitments for PDs; allowing PDs to diversify and expand their business; and
the operationalisation of NDS-Order Matching (NDS-OM) system.
In pursuance of the recommendations of the committee on banking sector reforms (Chairman:
Shri M. Narasimham, 1998), the process of transforming the call/notice money market into a
pure inter-bank market was completed in August 2005. This has been supported by the
development of a repo market outside the Reserve Bank, in which non-bank participants are
allowed to trade their surplus/deficit liquidity. Prudential limits have been placed on
borrowings and lendings of banks and PDs in the call/ notice money market.
A screen-based negotiated quote-driven system for all dealings in call/notice and term money
market (NDS-CALL) was operationalised with effect from 18 September 2006. The system
has been developed by the CCIL and is expected to improve ease of transactions and bring
about greater transparency and efficient price discovery.
In order to enable market participants to assess the liquidity conditions in an efficient and
transparent manner, information on transactions in the collateralised segment of the money
market is also being provided on the Reserve Bank's website since 24 April 2006.
11.3.1 Commercial Paper
Commercial Paper (CP), an unsecured money market instrument issued in the form of a
promissory note was introduced in India in 1990, with a view to enabling highly rated
corporate borrowers to diversify their sources of short-term borrowings and to provide an
additional instrument to investors. Information on CP issuance as reported by the Issuing and
Paying Agents (IPAs) on the NDS platform has been made available on the Reserve Bank's
website with effect from July 2005, to enhance transparency and facilitate wider
dissemination.
Certificates of Deposit
With a view to further widening the range of money market instruments and giving investors
greater flexibility in deployment of their short-term surplus funds, Certificates of Deposit
(CDs) were introduced in India in 1989. CD is a negotiable money market instrument and
issued in dematerialised form or as a Usance Promissory Note, for funds deposited at a bank
or other eligible financial institution for a specified time period. The minimum maturity
period of CDs was reduced from 15 days to 8 days with effect from 29 April 2005, to align it
with the minimum maturity of CPs and fixed deposits with banks.
11.4 DEVELOPMENT OF GOVERNMENT SECURITIES MARKET
With the abolition of the system of automatic monetisation of deficits and the switchover to
market related interest rates for market borrowings, it became possible to develop a genuine
market for government securities. Introduction of new instruments, such as, zero coupon
bonds, floating rate bonds and capital index bonds, establishment of Securities Trading
Corporation, the system of Primary Dealers and Satellite Dealers and the Delivery versus
Payments (DvP) system constituted the other areas of reforms in the government securities
market.
In order to deepen and widen the government securities market, it was essential to diversify
the investor base. In this context, retailing of government securities becomes critical. By
establishing a system of PDs and Satellite Dealers (SDs) with provision for liquidity support
from the Reserve Bank, it is expected that the dealers will take on a larger role in the primary
as well as secondary markets in government securities. The liquidity support arrangements -
based on bidding commitments and performance in both primary and secondary markets -
would help the dealers to make markets and to minimise volatility in security prices.
Dedicated gilt funds have also been provided liquidity support from the Reserve
Bank. Banks have been allowed to freely buy and sell government securities on an outright
basis and retail government securities to non-bank clients without any restriction on the
period between the sale and purchase. With a view to enabling dematerialisation of securities
of retail holders, National Securities Depository Ltd. (NSDL), Stock Holding Corporation of
India Ltd. (SHCIL) and National Securities Clearing Corporation Ltd. (NSCCL) have been
allowed to open SGL accounts with the Reserve Bank.
The implementation of the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management (FRBM) Act has
necessitated several structural and developmental measures for the government securities
market to prepare it for the withdrawal of the Reserve Bank from the primary segment.
(a) 'When Issued' Market for Fresh Issuance of Securities
Extension A 'when issued' (WI) market in government securities was introduced and trading
in this market had commenced from August 2006. To begin with, WI trading has been
permitted in reissuable securities. It is now proposed to extend 'when issued' trading in the
case of fresh issues of central government securities on a selective basis.
(b) Allowing Short Sale beyond Intra-day Settlement Cycle
On the basis of the recommendations of the technical group on the central government
securities market, intra-day short-selling in central government securities was permitted from
February 2006. On an assessment of the market feedback, eligible participants, viz.,
scheduled commercial banks (SCBs) and PDs have been allowed with effect from November
2006, to cover their short positions within an extended period of five trading days. As this
arrangement may result in carrying short positions across settlement cycles, the participants
would be allowed to deliver a shorted security by borrowing it through the repo market.
(c) Consolidation of Central Government Securities
The RBI believes that there is a need to enlarge the number of actively traded central
government securities in order to enhance liquidity and improve pricing in the market and is
pursuing its policies accordingly.
11.5 DEVELOPMENT OF CAPITAL MARKET
Setting up of depositories, clearing corporations/houses, stock exchanges etc. and
introduction of on¬line trading in all stock exchanges have helped improve the efficiency of
the capital market. Delisting norms have been tightened following the recommendations of
the Chandratre Committee that were accepted by SEBI. All publicly issued debt instruments,
regardless of the period of maturity, are presently required to be rated by credit rating
agencies. All listed companies are also required to publish unaudited financial results on a
quarterly basis. With a view to enhancing transparency in corporate affairs, SEBI accepted
the recommendations of the Committee on Corporate Governance (Chairman: Shri K.M.
Birla) and the listing norms have been modified to reflect a code of corporate governance.
With a view to detecting market manipulations, SEBI regularly monitors market movements
and oversees the activities of the stock exchanges. These measures in the capital market have
helped in improving information flows and in reducing the transaction costs in the stock
markets.
11.6 DEVELOPMENT OF FOREX MARKET
Measures to integrate Indian markets with those abroad were largely guided by the
recommendations of the report of the High Level Committee on Balance of Payments
(Chairman: Dr. C. Rangarajan) and the report of the Expert Group on Foreign Exchange
Markets in India (Chairman: Shri O.P. Sodhani). The former report recommended, inter alia,
liberalisation of current account transactions, compositional
shifts in capital flows - away from debt in favour of non-debt, strict regulation of external
commercial borrowings (ECBs) - particularly of shorter maturities, and measures to
discourage volatile elements in the inflows from Non-Residential Indians (NRIs). Against the
background of the gradual liberalisation of current transactions, a transition to the market-
determined exchange rate on 1 March 1993, was achieved through a successful
experimentation with a dual exchange rate system under the Liberalised Exchange Rate
Management System (LERMS) for one year, beginning with March 1992. In October 1993,
banks were permitted to rediscount export bills abroad at rates linked to international rates.
The introduction of 'Post-Shipment Export Credit in Foreign Currency (PCFC) in November
1993,' enabled Indian merchants to access funds at internationally competitive rates.
In October 1996, Authorised Dealers (ADs) were permitted to use FCNR (B) funds to lend to
their resident constituents for meeting their foreign exchange as well as rupee needs. Based
on the recommendations of the Sodhani Committee, several measures were instituted to
deepen and widen the forex market. ADs were permitted in, April 1998, to borrow from their
overseas offices/correspondents, as well as to invest funds in overseas money market
instruments up to US$ 10 million. In October 1998, this limit was raised to 15 per cent of Tier
I capital of the banks. The uniform limit of Rs. 15 crore on the overnight positions of the ADs
was removed with effect from 4 January 1996 and banks were allowed to operate on the
limits fixed by their management and vetted by the Reserve Bank. The Aggregate Gap Limit
(AGL), which was previously not to exceed US$ 100 million or six times the net owned
funds of a bank, was left to be fixed by the individual banks since April 1996, depending
upon their foreign exchange operations, risk-taking capacity, balance sheet size and other
relevant parameters subject to approval by the Reserve Bank.
Liberalisation of capital account should be viewed as a process and not as a single event. In
the approach to capital account convertibility (CAC), the initial reform measures were
directed at current account convertibility, leading to the acceptance of Article VIII of the
Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in August 1994. For
operationalising CAC in India, a clear distinction is made between inflows and outflows with
asymmetrical treatment between inflows (less restricted), outflows associated with inflows
(free) and other outflows (more restricted). Differential restrictions are also applied to
residents versus non-residents and to individuals versus corporate entities and financial
institutions. A combination of direct and market-based instruments of control is used for
meeting the requirements of a prudent approach to the management of the capital account.
The policy of ensuring a well diversified capital account with rising share of non-debt
liabilities and low percentage of short-term debt in total debt liabilities is reflected in India's
policies of foreign direct investment (FDI), portfolio investment and external commercial
borrowings. Quantitative annual ceilings on ECB, along with maturity and end-use
restrictions broadly shape the ECB policy. FDI is encouraged through a liberal but dual route
- a progressively expanding automatic route and a case-by-case route.
Portfolio investments are restricted to select players, particularly approved institutional
investors and the NRIs. Short-term capital gains are taxed at a higher rate than longer term
capital gains. Indian companies are also permitted to access international markets through
GDRs/ADRs, subject to the prescribed guidelines. Foreign investment in the form of Indian
joint ventures abroad is also permitted through both automatic and case-by-case routes.
The committee on Capital Account Convertibility (Chairman: Shri S.S. Tarapore) which
submitted its Report in 1998, highlighted the benefits of a more open capital account, but at
the same time, cautioned that CAC could pose tremendous pressures on the financial system.
To ensure a more stable transition to CAC, the report recommended certain signposts and
preconditions of which the three crucial ones relate to fiscal consolidation, mandated inflation
rate and strengthened financial system.
Keening in view the recommendations of the report, India has, over the years, liberalised
certain
transactions in its capital account. Vastly altered and liberal policy environment for the
external sector is reflected in the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (FEMA), which
replaced the earlier Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1983 (FERA). The new Act sets out its
objective as 'facilitating external trade and payment' and 'promoting the orderly development
and maintenance of foreign exchange market in India'.
In recent years, the Reserve Bank has taken several initiatives to liberalise the conduct of
foreign exchange business. A key consideration has been the rationalisation and
simplification of procedures with a view to facilitating prompt and efficient customer service
in external transactions.
The Reserve Bank, in consultation with the Government of India, had appointed a committee
on Fuller Capital Account Convertibility (FCAC) (Chairman: Shri S.S. Tarapore) on 20
March 2006. The committee submitted its report to the Reserve Bank in July 2006. Keeping
in view the recommendations of the committee, the RBI has initiated the following measures:
(a) Setting up of internal task force for procedural rationalisation and simplification
(b) Enhancement of limit under liberalised remittance scheme: Resident individuals
would henceforth be free to remit up to US$ 50,000 per financial year for any current or
capital account transaction or a combination of both. The existing facilities for gifts,
donations and investment by resident individuals in overseas companies would be subsumed
under this revised limit. The existing facility for private travel up to US$ 10,000 per financial
year will continue to be available on a self- declaration basis.
(c) Liberalisation of Exchange Earners' Foreign Currency accounts: All categories of
foreign exchange earners may henceforth retain up to 100 per cent of their foreign exchange
earnings in their Exchange Earners' Foreign Currency (EEFC) accounts with a view to
providing the facility uniformly to all eligible residents.
(d) Liberalised procedures with regard to project and service exports
(e) Enhancement of banks' borrowings from overseas
(f) Increased access to external commercial borrowings
(g) Higher flexibility for establishment of offices abroad
(h) Enhancement in FIFs investment limits in government securities
(i) Enhancement of ceiling in overseas investment by mutual funds
(j) Liberalisation of forward contract regulations
(k) Data collection and monitoring
Other Measures
(a) Delegation of Powers to Authorised Dealer Banks with Regard to Bank Guarantees
and/or LCs to Cover Temporary Trade Related Credits
Authorised dealer banks are permitted to allow advance remittances for import of services up
to US$ 100,000 without the counter-guarantee of a bank of international repute situated
outside India. As a measure towards further liberalisation, it is proposed to permit authorised
dealer banks to issue guarantees/ LCs for import of services up to US$ 100,000, where the
guarantee is intended to secure a direct contractual liability arising out of a contract between
a resident and a non-resident.
(b) Remittances Out of NRO Accounts
NRls and Persons of Indian Origin (PIOs) have been permitted to remit up to US $ one
million per calendar year for any bonafide purpose out of the balances in their Non-Resident
Ordinary (NRO) accounts. The amounts credited to the NRO accounts would also represent
the sale proceeds of immoveable property acquired by the non-resident concerned out of
her/his resources in India or proceeds
of property received by way of inheritance or gift. The sale proceeds of the immoveable
property are now not subject to any lock-in period.
11.7 REGULATORY FRAMEWORK FOR THE INDIAN FINANCIAL SYSTEM
The Reserve Bank exercises its supervisory role over the financial system encompassing
commercial and urban cooperative banks (UCBs), financial institutions, non-banking
financial companies (NBFCs) and PDs through the Board for Financial Supervision (BFS).
As on 31 March 2006, there were eighty-nine scheduled commercial banks [excluding
regional rural banks (RRBs)], 133 RRBs, 1,864 UCBs, 8 development finance institutions
(DFIs), 13,049 NBFCs (of which 434 NBFCs are permitted to accept/ hold public deposits)
and 18 PDs. The BFS, constituted as a committee of the central board of the Reserve Bank
since November 1994, is headed by the Governor with a Deputy Governor as Vice
Chairperson and other Deputy Governors and four Directors of the central board as members.
The BFS provides direction, on a continuing basis, on regulatory policies and supervisory
practices. In respect of state and district central cooperative banks and regional rural banks,
while the Reserve Bank is the regulator, the supervision is vested with the National Bank for
Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD). Insurance companies and mutual funds are
regulated by the IRDA and the SEBI, respectively. A coordinated approach to supervision is
ensured through a high level coordination committee on financial markets with the Governor
of the Reserve Bank, as Chairman, and the chiefs of SEBI, IRDA and Pension Fund
Regulatory and Development Authority (PFRDA) and the Secretary, Economic Affairs,
Ministry of Finance, Government of India as the members.
11.8 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS
1. In the call/notice money market the following participants are allowed to trade:
(a) all corporates
(b) all banks, Primary Dealers and Mutual funds
(c) only banks
(d) none.
2. The minimum maturity period of certificates of deposit (CDs) with effect from 29
April 2005 is:
(a) 8 days (b) 15 days
(c) 21 days (d) none.
3. Scheduled commercial banks (SCBs) and primary dealers (PDs) have been allowed
with effect
from November 2006, to cover their short positions within an extended period of:
(a) five trading days (b) two trading days
(c) short sales not permitted (d) none.
4. Resident individuals are free to remit in a financial year for any current or capital
account transaction
or a combination of both up to:
(a) US$ 25,000 (b) US$ 50,000
(c) US$ 10,000 (d) none.
11.9 ANSWERS TO 'CHECK YOUR PROGRESS'
1. (c), 2. (a) 3. (a), 4. (b).
11.10 KEYWORDS
Primary Dealers, Real-Time Gross Settlement (RTGS), screen-based negotiated quote-driven
system.
MODULE B, FUNCTIONS OF BANKS
Unit 12. Banker-Customer Relationship
Unit 13. Banker's Special Relationship
Unit 14. Payment and Collection of Cheques and Other Negotiable Instruments
Unit 15. Opening of Accounts of Various Types of Customers
Unit 16. Ancillary Services
Unit 17. Principles of Lending, Working Capital Assessment and Credit Monitoring
Unit 18. Priority Sector Advances
Unit 19. Agricultural Finance
Unit 20. Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises in India
Unit 21. Government Sponsored Schemes
Unit 22. Self-Help Groups
Unit 23. Credit Cards, Home Loans, Personal Loans, Consumer Loans
Unit 24. Documentation
Unit 25. Different Modes of Charging Securities
Unit 26. Types of Collaterals and their Characteristics
Unit 27. Non-Performing Assets
Unit 28. Financial Inclusion
Unit 12 BANKER-CUSTOMER RELATIONSHIP
STRUCTURE
12.0 Objectives
12.1 Introduction
12.2 Requirements to be Called a Bank
12.3 Banker-Customer Relationship
12.3.1 Debtor-Creditor (Bank is a Debtor and Customer is a Creditor)
12.3.2 Creditor-Debtor (Bank is a Creditor and Customer is a Debtor)
12.4 Bank as a Trustee
12.5 Bailee-Bailor Relationship (Bank-Bailee and Customer-Bailor)
12.6 Agent-Principal Relationship (Bank is Agent and Customer is Principal)
12.7 Lessor and Lessee (Bank is a Lessor and Customer is a Lessee)
12.8 Indemnifier and Indemnified (Bank is Indemnified or Indemnity Holder and Customer
is Indemnifier)
12.9 Anti-Money Laundering
12.9.1 Introduction
12.9.2 Stages of Money Laundering
12.9.3 Objectives of Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA)
12.9.4 Money Laundering - Risk Perception
12.10 Know Your Customer
12.10.1 Key Elements of Know Your Client (KYC) Policy
12.11 Obligations under Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002
12.12 Different Deposit Products or Services -
12.12.1 Deposit Products
12.13 Services to Customers and Investors
12.13.1 Merchant Banking
12.13.2 Lease Financing
12.13.3 Plastic Money
12.14 Summary
12.15 Check Your Progress
12.16 Answers to 'Check Your Progress'
12.0 OBJECTIVES
After reading this unit, you should be able to:
• describe the requirements of a bank
• describe the various relations between a bank and its customer
• explain the bank's obligations to its customers
• comment upon the limitations of these obligations
• enumerate the precautions to be taken by the bank while disclosing the information
regarding the customer.
12.1 INTRODUCTION
The basic function of a banker is accepting of money from the public by way of deposits and
deploying the same by means of loans and investments. Apart from this function, bankers
render a variety of services to their customers, like providing locker facility, keeping articles
in safe custody, collecting bills, cheques and so on. While doing so, different types of
relationships are created between the banker and the customers, depending upon the nature of
service rendered.
12.2REQUIREMENTS TO BE CALLED A BANK
The term 'Banking' has been comprehensively defined under the Banking Regulation Act
1949. According to Section 5(b) of the Banking Regulation Act, the term 'Banking' means
accepting for the purpose of lending or investment of deposits of money received from the
public, repayable on demand or otherwise and withdrawable by cheque, draft, order or
otherwise. According to the definition, the banker is engaged in the business of accepting
deposits from the public and utilising such deposits either for the purpose of lending or for
the purpose of investment.
Let us see what are the essentials laid down by the definition, so that we understand fully the
scope of the term 'Banking'.
Essentials to satisfy the requirements of the above definition are laid down as below:
a) Acceptance of deposits should be for the purpose of lending and investment. Thus,
companies accepting deposits for the purpose of financing their trading or manufacturing
business cannot be considered as a bank.
b) The deposit should be accepted from the public, i.e. “Nidhis” and multi-benefit societies
that accept deposit from their members, do not fall under this definition. Even the
Cooperative Societies are outside the purview.
c) Acceptance of deposit should be in the form of cash. Banks obtain large funds from
millions of depositors. The depositors do not have any control over the management of the
banks. The government of the country has therefore to take such steps that would safeguard
the interest of the depositors and the public in general and hence there existed a need to have
a comprehensive legislation in this regard.
The Act not only defines the term 'Banking' but also provides information about certain
essential ingredients to be fulfilled before an entity can be termed as a 'Bank'.
The important aspects are:
a) Only a firm or company and not an individual are permitted to act as a bank.
b) An individual is not allowed to act as a bank and he/she cannot use this term in the
business. A firm consisting of not more than ten partners or a company incorporated under
Indian Companies Act, 1956 can be a bank, a banker or a banking company. Under Section
5(c) of the Banking Regulation Act, 'Banking Company' means any company that transacts
the business of banking in India. Section 7(1) of the Banking Regulation Act prohibits use of
the words 'banker' or 'banking' or 'banking company' by a company other than a banking
company. Section 7(2) of the said Act further prohibits the use of such words by an individual
or a group of individuals or a firm.
c) Moneylenders are not bankers: The definition of banker does not include Indian
moneylenders or mahajans, Sahukars or Shettys. The main reason for this is that they run
their business as individuals or groups of individuals and not as a company registered under
the provisions of the Companies Act and the Banking Regulation Act. In the case of
Kadiresan Chettiar vs. Ramanathan Chettiar (AIR 1927, Madras 438), it was held that while a
moneylender lends his own money, a banker lends money of his customers/depositors. On the
recommendations of the Banking Commission 1972, the Reserve Bank of India has included
indigenous bankers in the term 'Banker' for the purpose of credit control and applying
banking regulations.
d) Accepting deposits of money from the public: Every institution carrying out the business
of banking must accept the deposits of money. The deposits of money must be from the
public and should not confine to the deposits from their members only. In the case entitled
Mahalaxmi Bank Limited vs. Registrar of Companies, it was decided that if a company gave
loan to the public but did not accept deposits from the public, it could not be considered as a
banking company under Section 5 of the Banking Regulation Act.
e) Acceptance for the purpose of lending or investment: An institution accepting deposits of
money without any purpose or with a purpose other than lending or investment cannot be
termed as a bank.
f) Deposit repayable to depositors on demand or otherwise: Deposits of money may be
repayable either on demand or if they are term deposits, on the expiry of the stipulated term
or period.
g) The deposits may be withdrawable by cheque, draft, order or otherwise. Banks refund the
money deposited with them to their customers, whenever the latter makes a demand for it by
cheque, draft or by any written order.
Thus, the principal function of a bank is to accept deposits from the public for the purpose of
lending and investment. In addition to the above principal functions, banks are authorised to
carry out certain other transactions as provided under Section 6 of the Banking Regulation
Act, 1949.
Important functions covered under Section 6 are:
a) Discounting of bills. b) Collection of cheques and bills,
c) Remittances. d) Safe custody of articles.
e) Hiring safe deposit lockers.
f) Conducting foreign exchange transactions.
g) Conducting (Central/State) government transactions,
h) Issuing letters of credit and guarantees.
These are various functions and services that are provided by banks to their customers and
the following are the relationships that arise from the services rendered:
12.3 BANKER-CUSTOMER RELATIONSHIP
12.3.1 Debtor-Creditor (Bank is a Debtor and Customer is a Creditor)
When a customer deposits money with his bank, the customer becomes a lender and the bank
becomes a borrower. The money handed over to the bank is a debt. The relationship between
the banker and the customer is that of a debtor and a creditor. The features of this relationship
are:
a) The money is lent to the bank and the bank is free to use it in a way most beneficial to it.
The bank is not bound to keep such money intact. It is not bound to return the notes and coins
of the same denomination as it was deposited.
b) Demand of payment should be made by the customer. The banker is not required to repay
the debt voluntarily, unlike in the case of commercial debt.
c) Demand should be made at the branch where the account exists. Except in the case of
drafts, travellers' cheque, ATM/credit card etc., the bank is not required to make the payment
to the customer elsewhere (at other centres), although all the branches of a bank are
constituents of the same bank (Chartered Bank vs. Mohd. Husain AIR 1965 Mad. 266). In the
above case, it was held that although the branches were agencies of one principal bank, they
were distinct for payment of customer's cheques.
d) The demand should be made in a proper manner. The customer should demand payment
not verbally or by a mere telephone call but by cheque, draft, withdrawal form, order or
otherwise. Further, demand should be made during the working days and working hours
under Sections 25 and 65 of Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881, respectively.
e) For the monies deposited, the creditor (customer) does not call for any security from the
debtor (bank) as in the case of commercial debts.
f) In the case of deposit accounts repayable on demand, the law of limitation does not begin
to run until demand has been made for repayment. In the case of fixed deposit, normally the
deposit receipt must be produced on or after the due date of deposit and the production of
receipt is in the nature of demand and hence, the law of limitation begins to run from the date
on which the receipt is produced.
12.3.2 Creditor-Debtor (Bank is a Creditor and Customer is a Debtor)
When the bank lends money to the customer, the customer is the borrower and the bank is the
lender. The relationship between the banker and the customer is therefore that of a creditor
and a debtor.
12.4 BANK AS A TRUSTEE
If a customer keeps certain valuables or securities with the bank for safe-keeping or deposits
a certain amount of money for a specific purpose, the banker, besides becoming a bailee, is
also a trustee. In the case of Subramanyan Pillai and Others vs. Palai Central Bank Ltd. (AIR
1962 Ker. 210), certain persons deposited Rs. 2,000 each in the bank as guarantee money to
purchase cars. The bank failed before they could get the vehicle. The court was of the view
that the bank should act as a trustee and that the money should be refunded from the bank's
asset on the basis of preferential debts. A trustee holds money or assets and performs certain
functions for the benefit of other person called beneficiary.
In another case, a customer remitted money with instructions to purchase shares/stocks of a
company. The bank bought shares in parts, but before completing the rest of the purchase, it
failed. It was held that the bank stood in the position of a trustee to the remitter and was
entitled to the refund of the unspent balance of amount.
12.5 BAILEE-BAILOR RELATIONSHIP (BANK-BAILEE AND
CUSTOMER-BAILOR)
When a customer deposits certain valuables, bonds, securities or other documents with the
bank, for their safe custody, the bank, besides becoming a trustee as discussed earlier, also
becomes a bailee and the customer is the bailor. According to the terms of Section 148 of the
Indian Contract Act, 1872, the bank becomes custodian of the securities of the customer and
hence as a bailee is liable for any loss caused to the bailor due to negligence. The finder of
lost goods (Section 71 Indian Contract Act) should return any increase in goods/animals to
the true owner. Under Section 164 (Indian Contract Act), the finder has to take care of such
goods as an ordinary prudent man. These are examples of bailee-bailor relationship.
12.6 AGENT-PRINCIPAL RELATIONSHIP (BANK IS AGENT AND CUSTOMER IS
PRINCIPAL)
One of the ancillary services rendered by the bank is remittance, collection of cheques, bills,
etc. on behalf of the customers. It further undertakes to pay regularly, electricity bills,
telephone bills, insurance premium, club fees, etc. In all such cases, the bank acts as an agent,
his principal being the customer. The relationship of agency, however, terminates on the
death, insolvency and lunacy of the customer or on completion of the work assigned. In the
case of remittances, although the relation is that of agency in the case of Traders Bank Ltd vs.
S. Kalyan Singh (AIR 1953), Punb p. 195, the High Court has held that the relations is that of
debtor-creditor.
12.7 LESSOR AND LESSEE (BANK AS A LESSOR AND CUSTOMER AS A LESSEE)
The banks provide safe deposit lockers to the customers who hire them on lease basis. The
relationship therefore, is that of lessor and lessee. In certain banks, this relationship is termed
as licensor and licensee. The bank leases out the space for the use of clients. The bank is not
responsible for any loss that arises to the lessee in this form of transaction except due to
negligence of that bank.
12.8 INDEMNIFIER AND INDEMNIFIED (BANK IS INDEMNIFIED OR INDEMNITY
HOLDER AND CUSTOMER IS INDEMNIFIER)
A contract by which one party promises to save the other from loss caused to him by the
conduct of the promisor himself or the conduct of any other person is called a contract of
indemnity - Section 124 (Indian Contract Act, 1872). In the case of banking, this relationship
happens in transactions of issue of duplicate demand draft, fixed deposit receipt etc. The
underlying point in these cases is that either party will compensate the other of any loss
arising from the wrong/excess payment.
12.9 ANTI-MONEY LAUNDERING
12.9.1 Introduction
Money laundering is a process whereby the origin of funds generated by illegal means is
concealed (drug trafficking, gun smuggling, corruption etc.). The objective of the operation,
which usually takes place in several stages, consists in making the capital and assets that are
illegally gained, seem as though they are derived from a legitimate source and inserting them
into economic circulation. Money laundering is not a new phenomenon: It is as old as crime
itself. Criminals have always endeavoured to conceal the origin of illegally generated funds
in order to erase all trace of their wrongdoings. Nevertheless, the forms and dimensions of
this type of crime have evolved in recent years. The offence of money laundering has been
defined in Section 3 of the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002 (PMLA) as
"whosoever directly or indirectly attempts to indulge or knowingly assists or knowingly is a
party or is actually involved in any process or activity connected with the proceeds of crime
and projecting it as untainted property shall be guilty of offence of money laundering."
12.9.2 Stages of Money Laundering
Placement: Placement is the first stage in the money laundering process. It refers to the
physical disposal of proceeds of criminal activity.
Layering: 'Layering' refers to the separation of illicit proceeds from their source by creating
complex layers of financial transactions. Layering conceals the audit trail and provides
anonymity (obscurity).
Integration: The third phase is integration, which means placing laundered proceeds into the
legitimate economy as normal funds.
12.9.3 Objectives of Prevention of Money Laundering (PMLA)
a) To prevent criminal elements from using the banking system for money laundering
activities.
b) To enable the bank to know/understand the customers and their financial dealings better.
This in turn would help the bank to manage risks prudently.
c) To put in place, appropriate controls for detection and reporting of suspicious activities in
accordance with applicable laws/laid down procedures.
d) To comply with applicable laws and regulatory guidelines.
e) To take necessary steps to ensure that the concerned staffs are adequately trained in Know
Your Client (KYC)/Anti-Money Laundering (AML) procedures.
12.9.4 Money Laundering - Risk Perception
Money laundering activities expose the bank to various risks such as operational risks,
reputation risk, compliance risk and legal risk. In order to ensure that banks are not used by
the money launderers, the Reserve Bank of India has issued KYC guidelines.
12.10 KNOW YOUR CUSTOMER
A customer, for the purpose of this policy, is defined as:
a) A person or an entity that maintains an account and/or has a business relationship with the
bank.
b) One on whose behalf the account is maintained (i.e. the beneficial owner).
c) Beneficiary of transactions conducted by professional intermediaries such as stock brokers,
chartered accountants, solicitors, etc., as permitted under the law and any person or entity
connected with a financial transaction.
12.10.1 Key Elements of Know Your Client (KYC) Policy
The key elements of the KYC policy are Customer Acceptance Policy, Customer
Identification Procedures, Monitoring of Transactions and Risk Management.
 Customer Acceptance Policy
The Bank will:
a) classify customers into various risk categories and based on risk perception
b) decide on acceptance criteria for each category of customers
c) accept customers after verifying their identity as laid down in Customer Identification
Procedures
d) not open accounts in the name of anonymous/fictitious/benami persons
e) strive not to inconvenience the general public who desire to transact banking business
 Customer Identification Procedures
Customer identification has been defined as identifying the customer and verifying his/her
identity by using reliable, independent source documents, data or information. Emphasis has
been laid on verifying customer identity, not only while establishing a banking relationship
but also at the time of executing a transaction or when the bank has a doubt about the
authenticity /veracity or the adequacy of the previously obtained customer identification data.
Wherever applicable, information on the nature of business activity, location, mode of
payments, volume of turnover, social and financial status etc., will be collected for
completing the profile of the customer.
Customers will be classified into three risk categories namely high, medium and low risk
catagories, based on the risk perception. The risk categorisation will be reviewed periodically.
Customer identification will be carried out in respect of non-account holders, approaching the
bank for high value one-off transaction as well as any person or entity connected with a
financial transaction, which can pose significant reputational or other risks to the bank.
Banks should obtain sufficient identification data to verify the identity of the customer,
his/her address/ location and also his/her recent photograph, while for legal persons/entities,
extra caution has been suggested.
An indicative list of documents/information to verify the identity, address and other features
suggested is given below.
For individuals: Legal name and any other name used in anyone of the following:
i) Passport, ii) PAN Card, iii) Voter identity card, iv) Driving licence, v) Identity card (subject
to the bank's satisfaction) and vi) Letter from recognised public authority or public servant
verifying the identity and residence of the customer to the satisfaction of the bank.
For correct permanent address anyone of the following:
i) Telephone bill, ii) Bank account statement, iii) Letter from recognised public authority, iv)
Electricity bill, v) Ration card and vi) Letter from employer (subject to the bank's
satisfaction).
For companies: To verify the name of the Company:
i) Certificate of Incorporation and MOA (Memorandum of Assosiation) & AOA (Article of
Assosiation)- Principal place of business - Mailing address of the Company, ii) Resolution of
the Board of Directors to open an account and identification of those who have authority to
operate the account, iii) Power of attorney granted to its managers, officers or employees to
transact business on its behalf, iv) PAN allotment letter - Telephone No./Fax No. and v)
Telephone Bill.
For partnership firms: To verify legal name:
i) Registration Certificate, if registered - Address, ii) Partnership Deed - Names of all partners
and their addresses, iii) Power of attorney granted to a partner or an employee of the firm to
transact business on its behalf, iv) Any officially valid document identifying the partners and
the persons holding power of attorney and their addresses, telephone no. of the firm and v)
Telephone Bill.
For trusts and foundations: Any one of the following is needed to verify the names of the
trustees, settlers, beneficiaries and signatories:
i) Certificate of registration, if registered, ii) Power of attorney granted to transact business on
its behalf - Names and addresses of the founder, the managers/directors and the beneficiaries,
iii) Any officially valid document to identify the trustees, settlers, beneficiaries and those
holding power of attorney, founders/managers/directors and their addresses, iv) Resolution of
the managing body of the foundation/association - Telephone/Fax No. and v) Telephone Bill.
Relaxation for small customers: If a person is unable to produce documents mentioned, a
relaxation is extended if:
a) Balance is not exceeding Rs. 50,000 in all their accounts taken together, and
b) the total credit in all the accounts taken together is not expected to exceed Rs. 1,00,000 in
a year, subject to introduction from another, at least six-month-old account holder who has
gone through complete KYC procedures and showing satisfactory performance. The
photograph is also to be verified by such an introducer. Further, RBI has suggested stopping
the transactions as and when balance reaches Rs. 40,000 and turnover reaches Rs. 80,000 by
notifying the customer.
Monitoring of Transactions: Monitoring of transactions will be conducted taking into
consideration the risk profile of the account. Special attention will be paid to all complex,
unusually large transactions and all unusual patterns, which have no apparent economic or
visible lawful purpose. Transactions that involve large amounts of cash, inconsistent with
the normal and expected activity of the customer, will be subjected to detailed scrutiny.
After due diligence at the appropriate level in the bank, transactions of suspicious nature
and/or any other type of transaction notified under the PML Act, 2002 will be reported to the
appropriate authority and a record of such transactions will be preserved and maintained for a
period as prescribed in the Act.
Risk Management: While the bank has adopted a risk-based approach to the implementation
of this policy, it is necessary to establish an appropriate framework covering proper
management oversight, systems, controls and other related matters.
The bank's internal audit of compliance with KYC/AML policy will provide an independent
evaluation of the same including legal and regulatory requirements. Concurrent/internal
auditors shall specifically check and verify the application of KYC/AML procedures at the
branches and comment on the lapses observed in this regard. The compliance in this regard
will be placed before the audit committee of the board at quarterly intervals.
All employees' training programmes will have a module on KYC Standards/AML Measures
so that members of the staff are adequately trained in KYC/AML procedures.
Principal Officer (Money Laundering Reporting Officer): The bank will designate a senior
officer as Principal Officer, who shall be responsible for implementation of and compliance
with this policy.
The illustrative duties will be as follows:
a) Monitoring the implementation of the bank's KYC/AML Policy. Reporting of Transactions
and sharing of the information as required under the law.
b) Maintaining liaison with law enforcement agencies.
c) Ensuring submission of periodical reports to the top Management/Board.
12.11 OBLIGATIONS UNDER PREVENTION OF MONEY LAUNDERING ACT, 2002
Section 12 of PMLA, 2002 casts the following reporting obligations for banking companies
to the Director, Financial Intelligence Unit-India (FIU-IND), besides obligations of record
keeping and preservation of information:
a) Cash Transaction Report (CTR)
i) all cash transactions of the value of more than Rs. 10 lakh or its equivalent in foreign
currency;
ii) all series of cash transactions integrally connected to each other, which have been valued
below Rs. 10 lakh or its equivalent in foreign currency where such series of transactions have
taken place within a month and the aggregate value of such transactions exceeds Rs. 10 lakh;
iii) all cash transactions where forged or counterfeit currency notes or banknotes have been
used as genuine and where any forgery of a valuable security has taken place. However,
individual transactions for below Rs. 50,000 are not to be included in CTR.
b) Suspicious Transactions Report (STR).
The strict implementation of the KYC guidelines will prevent the money launderers from
using the banking channels for their money laundering activities.
12.12 DIFFERENT DEPOSIT PRODUCTS OR SERVICES
12.12.1 Deposit Products
The major functions of a bank are to mobilise deposits from the public and to invest and/or
lend these deposits to individuals, firms and corporate institutions.
 Types of Deposits
Deposits are normally classified as demand deposits and time deposits. The main differences
between the two are listed here:
 Demand deposits
1. Payable on demand.
2. Low interest rates or no interest. .
3. includes current, savings, overdue deposits and unclaimed deposits.
4. Interest is paid on half yearly basis in saving accounts.
 Time Deposits
1. Repaid after expiry of the Deposit Period.
2. High interest rates, which vary according to period.
3. Time deposits from 7 days to 120 months period with or without reinvestment plans.
4. Interest is paid on quarterly rests and is *cumulative every quarter
 The Features of Demand Deposits
Demand deposits are classified into current accounts and savings accounts. We elaborate on
the features as under:
Current Deposits: Current deposit accounts are opened to meet the transactions of business
and trade and hence are not entitled to any interest from the bank. On the contrary, the bank
could levy charges for maintaining the accounts in the form of per page fees, per cheque leaf
debit charges, minimum balance fees etc. The minimum balance could differ from bank to
bank. There are no restrictions on the number of transactions per day but the customer has to
pay cheque leaf charges at the time of issue of cheque books by the bank. Current account is
meant, normally for trading or business transactions where every transaction made is only
through cheque.
Saving Deposits: Its purpose is to inculcate a habit of saving. It is opened by
individuals/trusts, etc. Interest is paid at a rate as determined by RBI. At present, it is 3.5 (4)
per cent per annum on the minimum balance in between 10th and last day of the month. The
bank's customers can withdraw amounts either by cheque or withdrawal form. Interest paid is
on a half yearly basis. Nomination facility is available. In the case of frequent return of
cheque due to insufficient funds, the bank can impose a penalty and ultimately close the
account after due notice to the customer. The numbers of withdrawals are restricted by each
bank and the minimum balance to be maintained could vary between Rs. 100 and Rs. 25,000.
 The Features of Time or Term Deposits
a) Accounts may be opened by individuals or firms or corporates or by designated
institutions.
b)Amount is repayable on maturity. Banks issue deposits with maturity from seven days to
one hundred and twenty months.
c) Rate of Interest is fixed for each bank for different periods.
d) Deposits are kept for a fixed period but could be withdrawn before maturity at a reduced
rate of interest.
e)The interest is cumulative on quarterly rests.
f)Tax has to be Deducted at Source (TDS) by banks, if the interest paid on deposits is Rs.
10,000 or more at a time. The rate of TDS is 10 per cent and surcharge as applicable as per
extant Income Tax Rules.
g)Term deposits are not transferable.
h) Term deposits maturing on Sundays and other public holidays or non-business days are
paid with interest for such days at the contract rate since the amount is not paid on the due
date.
i) Cash payment of term deposits is possible if the amount of the deposit receipt, including
interest thereon does not exceed Rs. 20,000. Amount exceeding this limit can be paid only
through cheque or is credited to operative saving or current account of the depositor,
j) Term deposits are classified under various schemes as:
i) Fixed Deposits (with simple interest payable every 6 months),
(ii) Monthly Interest Deposits (interest payable monthly),
iii) Quarterly Interest Deposits (interest is payable every quarter),
iv) Short-term Deposits (period of deposit less than a year),
v) Reinvestment Deposit Scheme (interest is not paid out but reinvested by the bank. The
interest is capitalized),
vi) Recurring Deposit Scheme (deposits are credited in equal instalments on monthly basis by
the customer).
Banks may vary the payment terms in combination with annuity, interest payment being
partial or full or flexible in nature etc., and offer variety of deposit products to suit the needs
of the customers.
12.13 SERVICES TO CUSTOMERS AND INVESTORS
 Objective
The main objective of services to customers and investors is to provide a comprehensive
range of services to the corporate sector, besides augmenting revenue earnings for the banks.
The primary activity of a merchant banker is to help a body corporate to mobilise funds either
through an IPO, popularly called a Public issue or Private Placements of Debt or Equity.
12.13.1 Merchant Banking Definition
Merchant bankers are financial intermediaries. They act as intermediaries of transfer of
capital from those who own it (Investor or Bond Subscriber) to those who use it (Corporates
or Governments).
Merchant bankers assist in introducing or selecting or appointing outside technical
consultants in addition to in-house technical personnel for preparation of a detailed project
report, market survey report, feasibility studies etc. If the company has already prepared the
project report, the viability of the project is seen from the financial angle; effective
implementation is carried out by guiding the corporate, with regards to procedural matters,
viz.:
a) Obtaining regulatory clearances such as RBI, SEBI, Ministry of Finance (MoF), stock
exchanges (BSE, NSE), and Registrar of Companies etc.
b) Planning and timing of IPO.
c) Underwriting (guaranteeing) of IPO by financial institutions or brokers. At present major
banks act as both merchant bankers and underwriters. But it is not mandatory that all banks
acting as merchant bankers to be underwriters.
d) Selection and appointment of Principal Broker and Sub-Brokers. With book building
now in vogue for IPO, the merchant bankers also help in identifying lead-book-runners and
sub-book runners.
e) Selecting and appointing the registrar for the Issue and fixing their remuneration.
f) Selecting and appointing advertising consultants or agencies for publicity campaigns,
investor conferences, analyst conferences and road shows.
g) Printing and distribution of prospectus and application forms to brokers and sub-brokers
and book runners.
h) Making application to stock exchanges for listing of the security.
i) Monitoring and reporting the progress of the offering to the company and regulatory
bodies and other stake holders if any.
12.13.2 Lease Financing
 Definition
This means leasing out the capital purchase of assets to another company against monthly
rents for asset's consumption or use.
Here, the finance is arranged by the institution, which does not enjoy the use of asset, called
Lessor. The lessor is entitled to write off a certain amount of capital cost against its taxable
profits until it is suspended. While the lessee is benefited in not investing for capital cost plus
lease expenses are permitted as revenue expense in the books for the lessee.
The lease can also be arranged on any existing freehold asset(s) or long leasehold property by
either mortgaging it or by selling it at market price to a leasing company; this leasing
company in turn would lease it back to seller of the asset on lease thus benefiting both. In a
lease, the hirer of the equipment will not become the owner thereof.
 Advantages to Lessee
a) Use of asset without incurring the capital cost, thus saving on cost benefit of capital use.
b) As lease rentals are permitted as a permitted business revenue expense, they lead to
depression in profits and ultimately less taxation on profits.
c) Since there is no capital cost, this does not impact the liability side of the balance sheet.
d) Credit worthiness of the lessee is intact if lessee approaches a financial institution for other
credit related facilities.
 Disadvantages to Lessee
a) Ownership of the asset is with the lessor and not the lessee.
b) Since the lessor imposes usage terms and conditions on assets, asset is permitted to be used
for agreed business purposes only; this takes away the leverage from lessee for utilising the
asset for alternative business purposes, if any.
c) Confiscation or repossession of asset by lessor on breach of terms and conditions of use of
asset.
d) Possibility of lessor/owner becoming insolvent or going into liquidation; thus in such a
scenario, the asset may be attached by the creditor's official liquidator.
12.13.3 Plastic Money
Payments for purchases can be made in cash, cheques or cards. In respect of cash, there is the
limitation that bigger payments cannot be made in cash on account of the need to carry bulk.
Cheques are not often accepted as the credit standing of the person issuing a cheque is not
apparent. In the circumstances, plastic money in the form of credit and other cards has
become a preferred mode of payments and has wide acceptance among public. With the
increasing use of plastic money the financial system is moving towards cashless transactions.
There are different types of plastic money, some of which are discussed below:
Charge Card: In this, transactions by the cardholder are accumulated over a period of time,
generally a month and the total amount is charged, i.e. debited to the account of the
cardholder. The cardholder is given time of about 25 to 50 days to credit his account, in case
there are insufficient funds in his account at the time of debit.
Since the transactions are only accumulated and charged when the holder is expected to pay
the amount, such cards are called charge cards.
Credit Card: The difference between the credit and charge card is that in case of charge card,
the amount becomes payable immediately on the debit to the account. In case of credit cards,
the cardholder is sent a bill indicating the dues and he/she has the option to pay the entire
amount as soon as the bill is received or choose to pay only certain percentage of the amount
billed, in which case the cardholder gets a credit to the extent of the balance amount of the
bill. Whereas no fee is levied if the full amount billed is paid within a given due date, a
service fee/interest is charged on the payment which is deferred. Whereas charge card would
require the cardholder's account in the concerned bank, the dues on the credit card can be
paid by a cheque drawn on any bank. In other words, a credit cardholder need not maintain an
account with the card issuing bank.
Like other loans and advances, credit card dues may also be defaulted. Thus, Credit Cards
might cause credit risk for the card issuing banks. As credit cardholders are dispersed in a
large geographical area where the card issuing bank may not have adequate reach and a
majority of the cardholders may not have accounts with the bank, the card issuing banks have
to select the clients for issue of cards after a thorough appraisal.
Collection of card dues should also be done carefully and methodically. Banks, credit card
subsidiaries of banks and card companies use call centers and collection/recovery agents in
managing card dues.
There are a number of parties involved in the credit card business. They are:
i) Cardholder: The person on whose name the card has been issued, ii) Card Issuing Bank:
This is the bank which identifies the customer and issues the card. This bank will raise a bill
on the customer as per agreed billing schedule, iii) Merchant: The person who has accepted
payment through the credit card, iv) Merchant Bank or Acquiring Bank: Once the card is
swiped in the shop, the merchant will seek credit from his/her bank. The bank which
reimburses the merchant is known as the merchant bank or acquiring bank, v) Collecting
Bank: The Merchant Bank will claim the payment from the card issuing bank. This is known
as the collecting bank, vi) VISA and MasterCard are companies which run the credit card
operations and they capture all deals and settle the dues among the different intermediaries.
Debit Cards: Debit cards are same as the credit cards. The only difference in this card is that
the amount of dues from the cardholder for each and every transaction is debited to
cardholder's account as soon as each transaction is notified to the issuer. If the balance is
insufficient to cover the debit, the difference becomes payable immediately or else a service
fee is levied. If the amount payable is overdue for a long period, the card may be cancelled.
Quite obviously, a debit card may not be the appropriate card for those who would like to
have a credit. This has, however, an advantage in the sense that it replaces the requirement of
carrying cash or cheque book, when the transactions are being carried out. As the transactions
in the Debit Card are debited to the account instantaneously, they are relatively less risky to
banks than credit card.
Debit cards are thus suitable to customers who are willing to avoid the debt trap-like
situations and lately debit cards are replacing paper money in wallets; more so after banks
started issuing ATM-cum-debit cards. Here, unlike in the case of credit cards, the cardholders
do not fall into debt trap, because with debit cards, the cardholders' accounts are directly and
immediately debited up to the limit of the balance available, as there is no prescribed credit
limit on debit cards.
Let us now list down some salient features of debit cards:
a) Works like a passbook withdrawal, thus withdrawals more than that of available balance in
the account of the customer are not allowed.
b) No credit loss to banks since the system works on available funds in the customers'
account.
c) It is a paper-less system of payment, i.e. no paper money or cheques are required.
d) Payees and/or member establishments are sure of payments, as the system operates only
upon the debit to account of the payee.
e) No transaction costs to customers.
*(f) Since the payments are directly debited from the account of payee, there is no late
payment fees payable by payee nor there any interest earnings for banks as there is no credit
involved.)*
g) Zero-risk weightage on debit cards as compared to credit cards where the same has a 125
per cent risk weightage.
ATM Card: These are cards issued to the savings account holders for drawing cash from
Automated Teller Machines which can be placed in the branch or off site. Some of the
debit/credit cards are also used as ATM cards. The ATMs ensure availability of cash round the
clock and the customer need not visit the branch for small transactions.
Advantages of the Credit Card System:
The advantages of credit card system to all those who are concerned are as under:
To the cardholder:
• It is convenient for a cardholder to carry a credit card in his/her wallet and make payment
towards travel or purchase. It allows the cardholder to draw cash too.
• It inculcates a sense of financial discipline in them.
• It provides a proof of purchase through banking channels to strengthen the cardholders'
position in case of disputes with sellers etc.
• It also allows giving spending power to add-on members.
• It also extends additional facilities like insurance cover/discount etc.
To the merchant establishment:
• Increase in sales because of increased purchasing power of the cardholder due to credit
available to the card holder
• Preferred locations by a cardholder.
• Merchant establishments can avoid provision of direct credit to customers.
• Systematic accounting since sale receipts are routed through banking channels.
• Advertising and promotional support on a national scale.
• Development of a prestigious clientele base.
• Assured and immediate settlement / payment.
Avoidance of the cost and security related problems involved in handling cash.
To banks:
• Scope and potential for better profitability out of share earned from the traders'
turnover.
• Helps in establishing banking relationship with new customers.
• This also provides additional customer service to the existing clients.
• Better network spread of cardholders and their increased use means higher popularity
and image for the banks.
• Savings of expenses on cash holding/stationery printing and manpower to handle
clearing transactions.
12.14 SUMMARY
The term 'Banking' has been comprehensively defined under the Banking Regulation Act,
1949. According to the definition, the banker is engaged in the business of accepting the
deposits from the public and utilizing such deposits either for the purpose of lending or for
the purpose of investment. Not only the term 'Banking' is defined but the Act provides for
essentials to be fulfilled before an entity can be termed as 'Bank'. In addition to the above
primary functions, banks are authorised to carryout certain other transactions as provided
under Section 6 of the Act. These functions and services provided by banks to their customers
give rise to certain relationship between them, with the opening of an account by the
customer with a banker. The application for opening an account is considered as a letter of
agreement for establishing the banker-customer relationship. The general view is that the
banker-customer relationship is mainly that of a debtor and a creditor with certain special
features.
However, today the range of banking services is more extensive and indeed is expanding all
the time. So it must be expected that other relationships will arise besides that of debtor and
creditor. For instance, the relationship of principal and agent is present when the customer
instructs his bank to buy or sell stocks on his behalf and when items are held in safe-custody
the relationship is that of bailer and bailee. Where the bank's executorships service takes on
the administration of a deceased's estate, the relationship is that of trustee and beneficiary.
Duties akin to a trusteeship might also happen when a branch comes into possession of funds
or property that belong to a third party, as when the bank has sold property in mortgage and
has a surplus to pass to the subsequent mortgagee. Obviously, the relationship with the
customer in that situation is that of a mortgagor with a mortgagee on the customer.
The roads to progress and prosperity can easily be made through friendly behaviour with the
customers. If the bankers wish to develop their organisational image, they have to offer better
services and cooperation, coupled with courteous service to gain a competitive edge. So the
relationships depend on the nature of transaction and changes from customer to customer. A
bank customer may be a creditor, a beneficiary and a bailor simultaneously when he/she
deposits money, remits money by mail transfer and/or forgets a document in the bank
inadvertently (not for security of any loan/advances).
Gathering/collecting of information from the borrower is essential in lending to him. This is
known as Know Your Customer (KYC). Such information could be gathered from the
statements/financial details and personal interview given by the borrower, about quality of
products/services, efficiency of labour, the technical knowledge of the product, confidence
level, financial plans, marketing strategies, lifestyles, family conditions etc. Questions
relating to business acumen planning, organising, marketing and general administration can
also be known. The level of ethics, resourcefulness and drive for performance and results
could be obtained through personal interview.
Deposits are lifelines of banks. According to Section 5(b) of Banking Regulation Act, 1949,
the banking means accepting deposits for the purpose of lending and investment. Such
deposits are either demand
or time deposits. Demand deposits are made up of current accounts and saving accounts,
while time deposit include FDR, short-term deposits, recurring deposits,
MIDS/QIDS/reinvestment deposits etc.
Time deposits are kept for a minimum period of seven days to a maximum of one hundred
and twenty months. Rate of interest varies with the period and the policy of the individual
banks.
Other services provided by banks are merchant banking, lease financing, plastic money like
credit or debit cards etc.
With the increasing use of credit cards, debit cards and ATM cards, the society is moving
towards cashless transactions. In India, however, the use of the credit cards is restricted
mostly to personal transactions. Credit and debit cards, popularly also known as plastic
money, are used to make payments for purchase of goods and services by the holder from the
member establishments. As the name signifies, there is no cash payment involved. Credit
cards are available at a certain charge and overdue rate of interest varies from 18 per cent to
36 per cent per annum whereas the debit cards are issued free to user banks' customer or
holder. Banks run the credit risk on the holder as and when the credit cards are issued,
whereas debit cards are free of such risk on banks because the risk is limited to available
balance in the holders' account.
Merchant banking is providing services from preparing project reports to finally obtaining
finance from financial institutions, both public and private. Lease financing is to finance the
capital expenditure of the project with monthly receivables from the actual user. In leasing,
the finance is provided by the lessor and utilisation of asset(s) is by the lessee.
12.15 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS
1. Principle functions of banks are:
(a) accepting deposits (b) lending and investing
(c) non-fund business and remittance services (d) all of above (e) only (a) and (b).
2. In deposit accounts, the main relationship between bank and customer is:
(a) creditor-bank, debtor-customer (b) debtor-bank, creditor-customer
(c) agent-principal (d) servant-owner
(e) only (a) and (b).
3. When a bank lends money to the corporate person the relationship is:
(a) borrower and lender (b) creditor-debtor
(c) debtor-creditor (d) customer and client
4. Bailor-bailee relationship is applicable in:
(a) cash deposited with cashier by customer
(b) safe deposit locker
(c) demand draft issued by bank
(d) keeping articles in safe custody with bank
(e) none of above
5. What relationship is created when the bank collects a cheque in clearing?
(a) holder for value (b) clearing member and principal
(c) agent and principal (d) collecting bank and holder
(e) none of above
6. When any FDR is lost by a customer of a bank, what document is executed:
(a) guarantee bond (b) government bond
(c) promissory bond (d) indemnity bond
7. A credit voucher for Rs. 44,444 favouring Tarun was wrongly posted to Varun Bose
by the bank, the relationship established with Varun Bose is of:
(a) trustee and beneficiary (b) debtor and guarantor
(c) creditor and indemnifier (d) creditor and debtor
(e) none
8. Mr. Nanhe has a bank account and credited Rs. 20 lakh in it. Subsequently he was
arrested on charge of fraud. The police informed the bank not to allow withdrawals from his
account. Two days later, bank receives a cheque of Rs. 15,000 favouring Nanhe's creditor.
What should the bank do?
(a) not to pay cheque
(b) return cheque with memo stating A/c holder in jail
(c) honour the cheque
(d) get police orders for payment
(e) get court orders for payment
9. Account holder X draws a cheque for Rs. 5,000 favouring Rajesh (a minor aged 13
years) or bearer. Rajesh presents the cheque on counter duly signed on the back. What should
the banker do with the cheque of a minor?
(a) refuse, since no contractual capacity
(b) pay the cheque after inquiring with X
(c) pay to Rajesh without any responsibility of bank
(d) ask Rajesh to bring his parents
(e) Section 26 N.I. Act, 1881, does not allow minor to receive payment
10. A cheque drawn for Rajkumar or order is stolen. The thief made endorsement as
Rajkumar on the cheque in his favour. The cheque is presented in clearing and paid by bank.
True owner later on sent legal notice to bank. What is the liability of the bank?
(a) the paying bank will get protection under N.I. Act
(b) forgery does not give any rights to bank, hence liable
(c) under section 85, the paying bank is liable
(d) under section 131, the paying bank is liable.
11. After close of business hours by 1.30 hrs. the account holder himself availed payment.
At 4.15p.m. (after close of 1.45 hrs) income tax attachment order is received by bank. What
would be the liability of paying bank?
(a) payment is made in due course and as payment is debitable next day, bank is
protected.
(b) payment is not in due course since paid after reasonable time (i.e. 1.30 hrs. late for
today).
(c) attachment order will be effective after bank's right of lien over the late payment bank
should approach the customer to get the order changed to next day.
12. Ritesh issued a cheque at 3:30 p.m. (one hour after close of business hours of the
bank) to Shubha. Shubha approached to the bank and on request paid the money at 4:00 p.m.
as late payment;Ritesh arrived to the bank and stopped payment of cheque issued to Shubha
at 4:30 p.m. on the same day. Who is liable for loss?
(a) Payment after business hours is not a payment in due course hence bank is liable,
Section 10 N.I. Act.
(b) Payment even though after business hours but within banking hours is protected under
Section 31.
(c) Payment late for today is protected under Section 85.
(d) Refused to accept stop payment instructions since late for today.
13. Section 131 of N.I. Act gives protection for collection of
(a) Bills of Exchange (b) Promissory Note
(c) Hundis (d) Cheque
(e) All of the above
14. Rajkumar wants a demand draft striking the word 'Order' and writing the word
'Bearer'. Can bank help him?
(a) Bearer Draft is unlawful under Section 31 of RBI.
(b) Bearer Draft can be issued like a cheque.
(c) Signature of the payee should be attested on the back of draft by the issuing branch.
(d) Attestation of the signature of the payee on a separate slip of paper by bank (without
striking out the word 'Order' on draft).
15. A draft purchased is reported lost and the purchaser wants to stop the payment of the
draft. Can the Bank do it?
(a) Bank cannot stop payment since it is a promissory note.
(b) Bank can stop payment since covered under negotiable instrument.
(c) Bank can ask the purchaser to suffer for negligence and bank cannot help.
(d) Bank would issue stop payment instructions only after two weeks from date of issue.
16. Objectives of KYC:
(a) to ensure appropriate customer identification
(b) to monitor transactions of suspicious nature
(c) to ensure that he/she would not deceive the bank.
(d) if loan given it would not be a NPA
(e) Only (a) and (b)
17. Sources of credit information
(a) Information's on visit to business premises
(b) On interview with borrower and from documents submitted
(c) Information's from loan proposal
(d) All of above
(e) Only (b) and (c)
18. Demand Deposits are those which can be withdrawn:
(a) On Request (b) On Sanction by Manager
(c) On Demand (d) On Persuasion
19. Current accounts deposits are not entitled to
(a) Cheque book above 100 leaves (b) Monthly Statements
(c) Cash Payments (d) Interest
(e) All of the above.
20. In saving account deposits, interest is paid on balance in the account between
10th to last day of month.
(b) Average
(d) Last balance at the end of month
(b) Financial Intermediaries
(d) Underwriters
(a) Maximum (c) Minimum
(b) Debt and debt related finance
21. Merchant bankers are:
(a) Financial Brokers
(c) Credit Appraisers
(e) All of the above.
22. Merchant bankers' activity relate to:
(a) Equity and equity related finance
(d) Non-Fund Business
(c) Fund Business (e) None of the above
23.Advantages of Lease Financing:
(a) Alternative use of funds b) Arrangement for faster and cheaper credit
(c) Increased capacity to borrow (d) Trading on Tax Shield
(e) All of above
24.Disadvantages of Leasing:
(a) Deprivation of asset ownership (b) Deprivation of asset in case of default.
(c) Attachment on owner going insolvent (d) None of the above
(e) All of (a) to (c)
25. Disadvantages to Credit Card holders:
(a) Over Spending Debt Trap (b) Frauds due to loss or theft of cards
(c) Forged signatures (d) Forged charge slips
(e) All of above (f) Only (a) and (b)
26.The difference between the credit and the debit card is:
(a) Your account gets debited immediately on using a credit card
(b) Your account gets debited immediately on using a debit card
(c) Your account does not get debited immediately on using a debit card
(d) None of the above
27. Credit risk to the bank is high from the:
(a) Credit cardholders(b) Debit cardholders
(c) Both the above (d) None of the above
28. The bank which pays the merchant for the transactions is called as:
(a) issuer bank(b) clearance bank
(c) acquiring bank (d) none of the above
12.16ANSWERS TO CHECK YOUR PROGRESS'
1. (d), 2. (b), 3. (b), 4. (d), 5. (d), 6. (d), 7. (d), 8. (c), 9. (c), 10. (a), 11. (b), 12. (a), 13. (d),
14. (d), 15. (a), 16. (e), 17. (d), 18. (c), 19. (d), 20. (c), 21. (b), 22. (a), 23. (e), 24. (e), 25. (e),
26. (b), 27. (a), 28. (c).
12.17KEYWORDS
Creditor, Debtor, Bailor, Bailee, Lessor, Lessee, Trustee, Beneficiary, Agent, Principal,
Indemnifier, Indemnified, Anti-money Laundering, Know-Your-Customer (KYC), Demand
Deposits, Time Deposits, Minimum Period of Deposit, Tax Deduction at Source (TDS), Tax
on Interest Earned by the Bank's Customer, Recurring Deposits, Merchant Banking, Initial
Public Offering (IPO), Public Issue, Underwriting, Listing of Shares, Lease Financing, Bill
Finance, Whole Turnover, Off Balance Sheet, Credit Risk, Credit Card and Debit Card, ATM
Card.
Unit 13, BANKER'S SPECIAL RELATIONSHIP
STRUCTURE
13.0 Objectives
13.1 Introduction
13.2 Mandate - Definition
13.3 Power of Attorney (P/A) - Definition
13.3.1 Delegation of Power
13.4 Garnishee Orders
13.4.1 Bank - Dos and Don'ts under Garnishee Order
13.5 Banker's Lien
13.6 Right of Set-off - Definition
13.6.1 Essential Features of Set-off
13.7 Let Us Sum Up
13.8 Check Your Progress
13.9 Answers to 'Check Your Progress'
13.10 Keywords
13.0 OBJECTIVES
A study of this unit will help you to understand the concepts of mandate, power of attorney,
garnishee order, banker's lien and right of set-off.
13.1 INTRODUCTION
Normally, the account of a customer with a banker is operated by the customer himself. There
are occasions, when the account holder gives an authority to another person through some
legal documents to operate the account on his behalf. In such a case, a special relationship is
created between banker and customer.
Further, the obligation of a banker to honour a cheque drawn on the customers' account is
subject to the condition that the money lying in the account is properly applicable for making
payment. There are cases where a banker is justified in refusing payment of a cheque.
13.2 MANDATE – DEFINITION
Definition: A person competent to enter in to a contract may authorise another person to open
and operate an account on his behalf. This authority can be granted by a mandate or a power
of attorney.
A mandate is an authority given by the account holder in favour of a third person to do
certain acts on his behalf. This is issued by an account holder with a direction to his/her
bankers authorising the person to operate the account on his behalf. The following are the
salient points of a mandate:
• The customer informing the bank that he has authorised a person (mandatory) to
operate the account on his behalf.
• The signatures of the mandatory are obtained in the mandate letter and are verified by
the customer.
• The mandate is normally issued for a short and temporary period.
• A mandate is not acceptable from institutions. Institutions can issue a power of
attorney.
• In the case of joint account holders, all customers must sign the mandate irrespective
of operational instructions, while in the case of a partnership firm, all partners should sign the
mandate letter.
• A mandate ceases to be valid on death, insanity, insolvency and bankruptcy of the
account holder.
• A mandate can be withdrawn anytime by the account holder/s.
13.3 POWER OF ATTORNEY (P/A) – DEFINITION
It is a document executed by one person called donor (principal in favour of another person
called donee agent) to act on behalf of the former, as per authority given in the document.
Following are the salient features of P/A:
(a) Two types of P/A are generally granted:
1. General or universal
2. Special or limited.
(a. )General P/A is issued for acting in more than one transaction and confers very extensive
powers to donee. Special or Limited P/A is issued for specific purpose and often it is for a
single transaction.
(b) General P/A gives power to sign cheques, stop payment of cheques, to sign borrowal
documents,
on behalf of the principal.
(c) It is a stamped document and is executed in the presence of a Notary Public/Magistrate of
a Court/Government official authorised to do so.
(d) P/A holder must sign as
Per pro
Sd/- Constituted Attorney
125
The Principal can revoke the P/A at any time for future transactions. A power of attorney
stands revoked by the death, insanity or insolvency (winding up or liquidation in case of
companies) of the principal.
13.3.1 Delegation of Powers
If the holders of a joint account want to empower a third party to operate the joint account,
the authority should be signed by all the account holders. Any authority permitting the
operation on a partnership account by a third party should be signed by all the partners. In the
case of limited companies, delegation of authority by a person duly authorised to open and
operate on the company's account is possible only if that person has the specific authority to
further delegate his powers to a third person. The power of attorney has to be affixed with the
common seal of the company. Fiduciaries such as executors, administrators and legal
guardians cannot appoint agents. An attorney cannot delegate his powers unless his power of
attorney specifically provides for the power of substitution. In case more than one person has
been authorised, clear instructions about the operation of the account, whether to be operated
singly or jointly must be obtained.
13.4 GARNISHEE ORDERS
Garnishee order is an order of the Court obtained by a judgement creditor attaching the funds
belonging to a judgement debtor in the hands of his debtors, including a bank, who is called
Garnishee, advising not to release the money until directed by the Court to do so.
It is a process of law in favour of judgement-creditor for a debt due from the judgement-
debtor (bank customer) upon a third party for attachment. The order is issued under the
Indian Civil Procedure Code, Order 21 Rule 46, of the Act. A garnishee order served on a
bank attaches the credit balance in the account of the customer named, to the extent specified
in the order. If no amount is specified, the order attaches all sums owing and accruing to the
customer as on the date and time it is served and received by the bank. Cheques presented
after service of the garnishee order should be returned with the remark 'Refer to Drawer'. The
service of the garnishee order nisi is the preliminary proceedings of a Court. This is to be
followed by subsequent proceedings of a Court to make it absolute, when it is called
garnishee absolute. The order can only relate to the present balance in the account of the
customer, i.e. amount due and accruing due or payable to the customer at the time of receipt
of the order.
13.4.1 BANK - Dos and Don'ts under Garnishee Order
1. Payments of cheques: In case of cash payment of cheques, if order is received after debit to
the account, but before the payment of cash, better course would be to refuse payment, with
appropriate reason indicated for non-payment. In the case of cheques received in clearing, if
the order is received before the stipulated returning time of clearing, then, the cheques must
be returned. If the transfer of amount is done internally in another customer A/c the credit can
be cancelled and cheque be returned unpaid, provided the other customer has not been
advised of the credit.
2. Right to set-off: When a bank has a prior right to set-off, then the bank is not bound by the
garnishee order. Where lien is marked on fixed deposit receipts, it cannot be attached by a
garnishee order. However, the fact of 'right to set-off has to be intimated to court and the
order must be vacated. It should be noted that any excess over the lien marked is attachable
by the garnishee order.
3. Uncleared effects and subsequent credits in a/c: Credits received subsequent to garnishee
order are not attachable because debts due or accruing at the time of receipt of order are only
attachable.
However, in case where there is an agreement for withdrawal by the customer of unrealised
126
credits, such amounts are attachable. The portion of loan facilities not yet drawn cannot be
considered as monies as it does not constitute a debt at all and as such cannot be garnished.
4. Joint accounts: When a garnishee order is in a single name and the customer/s account
is in joint
names (husband and wife, two brothers, mother and daughter or two friends) with the
operation clause 'either or survivor', the monies lying in such account cannot be attached.
However, if the amount is payable to former or survivor, it can be attached even though the
garnishee order is in the former's name only. This is because, the money is a debt due and
accruing to the former in his lifetime and to the survivor only after the death of the former.
5. Trust accounts: The outstanding amount in a trust account cannot be attached, if the
judgement
debtor has deposited the money as a trustee.
6. Partnership accounts: The personal account of a partner can be attached for the firm's
debt because partners are jointly and severally liable for the firm's debts. Nevertheless, the
firm's account cannot be attached for individual debts of the partners.
7. Liquidator: When a company is the judgement - debtor, an order attaching the
accounts of the liquidator, cannot be passed as the money does not belong to the company but
to the liquidator.
8. When the garnishee order does not name the customer correctly or with a sufficient
accuracy, to enable the bank to identify the account in its books, the bank is not bound to act
upon it and is not responsible for passing cheques till the order is amended.
9. In case where the customer is having more than one account in the bank's branch, one
is in debit and the other is in credit balances, the net result if in credit can be attached. The
order will not attach only the credit balance account. But if the debit balance is in a loan
account, which has not been recalled by the bank on the date of service of order, credit into
another account cannot be adjusted.
10. The bank cannot appropriate the credit balance towards the contingent liabilities of
the customer,when a garnishee order is served.
11. Balances held outside India cannot be attached. The above rules also apply to
attachment orders issued by income tax officers under The Income Tax Act, 1961. The
attachment order under this act lays down certain procedures regarding recovery of tax from
the assessee in default. Under the Section 226(1) of the Act, the Income Tax Officer may, by a
notice in writing, call upon any person (including a banking company), from whom money is
due or may become due to the assessee or any person who holds or may subsequently hold
money for, or on account of the assessee to pay to the Income Tax Officer either immediately
or upon the money becoming due, so much of the money as is sufficient to satisfy the tax due
from the assessee.
The order of the ITO may attach:
(a) any debt due and payable;
(b) debts due but not payable on the date of receipt of the notice; and
(c) any amount received subsequently.
Any balance lying in a joint account can also be attached, even though, a notice is issued on a
single account. The shares of the joint account holder in such accounts shall be presumed to
be equal, unless the contrary is proved.
13.5 BANKER'S LIEN
Lien is the right of the banker to retain possession of the goods and securities owned by the
debtor until the debt due from the latter is paid. The banker's lien is an implied pledge. A
banker acquires the right to sell the goods which came into his possession in the ordinary
course of banking business, in case the
127
debt is not paid. Section 171 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872, gives to the banker an absolute
right of general lien on all goods and securities received by the banker. However, when a
customer inadvertently leaves a packet containing certain share certificates, life insurance
policies, fixed deposit receipts of other banks etc., while leaving the bank premises, the
banker will have no right of lien over those securities because those were not given to the
banker in the normal course of banking business.
1. Where a right can apply?
(a) To sell: A banker's general lien gives the right to sell the debtor's properties.
(b) To a specific person: The right under Section 171 is given not only to the banker but
also to
factors, wharfingers, attorneys of high courts and policy brokers. As such, no separate
agreement is required.
(c) Against the customer: The right is exercised on the goods and securities of the
customer only.
The right cannot be exercised when the debtor has a joint account.
2. Where a right cannot apply?
(a) Safe Custody Articles: When a customer deposits securities, ornaments and other
valuable
for their safe custody with a banker, the latter acts as a trustee/bailee, therefore the bank
cannot exercise the right of lien unless covered by a special agreement.
(b) Documents/money deposited for specific purposes: Documents/money deposited with
a specific purpose cannot be taken under lien.
(c) Articles left negligently in bank premises: Such articles/securities cannot be taken
under lien.
(d) Immature debts: Lien cannot be exercised when the debt has not yet matured. The
bank discounts a 90 days bill for Rs. 50,000 maturity on 17-11-04 could not have a lien over
it before its maturity date.
(e) Stolen goods: If the customer has stolen the goods/securities of the real owner and
delivers them to this bank, the bank cannot have lien over it although the transaction has
taken place in the ordinary course of business.
(f) No simultaneous rights to bank: When the right of set-off is available to the bank, lien
right
cannot apply. These two different rights cannot be exercised simultaneously at the same time.
13.6 RIGHT OF SET-OFF - DEFINITION
Set-off is the right of a debtor to take into account a debt owing to him by a creditor, when
claiming a debt due from him to the creditor. In the case of a banker, the right of set-off
enables him to adjust a debit balance in a customer's accounts, with any balance outstanding
to his credit in the books of the bank. In other words, the banker can adjust his claim from the
amount that is payable to the customer.
13.6.1 Essential Features of Set-off
(a) It is a statutory right and can also arise out of an agreement between the parties
concerned.
(b) There should be mutual debts and the debts should be for certain sums, while the
claim and the cross claim should be for certain sums.
(c) The claims and cross claims should be both for determined amounts. Where the
customer has stood as a guarantor to another party, his credit balance cannot be set-off against
the borrowers' dues, till
the guarantee amount is determined. For the purpose of set-off, all the branches of a bank are
considered as a single entity.
(d) The set-off can be applied only to those debts, which are due and recoverable on the
date of exercising
the set-off.
(e) Indebtedness should arise in the same rights. Where the bank has noticed that the
amount in the customer account is held under trust, the bank cannot exercise the right against
a debit balance on
128
A deceased's credit account and a customers debit account cannot be combined.
Automatic right of set-off (i.e. set-off without notice) arises in the following cases:
(i) Death or insanity/insolvency of the customer
(ii) Insolvency of a partner or on the winding up of a company
(iii) Receipt of garnishee order
(iv) Receipt of notice of assignment of customer's credit balances (v) Receipt of a notice of
secured mortgage over the security charged to the bank. The account of a sole proprietor (of a
trading firm) and his individual account can be combined.
A customer does not have a right of set-off against various accounts of various branches
(Mohammed Hussein Saheb vs. Chartered Bank (1965) AIR Mod. 266.).
13.7LET US SUM UP
There are various rights of a banker. These have been vested by the law of the country. Along
with the rights, there are certain obligations too which a banker is required to fulfil. Such
rights and obligations under the special relationship are mandates and power of attorney.
Account holder is authorised to operate the account through a third person, in addition to
himself, by suitable authority for one time basis and/or also for various functions through a
power of attorney. Such P/A is either general or special in nature.
Lien means right of the creditor to retain possession of goods/securities owned by the debtor
till the debt is paid. Lien is of two types: (a) general and (b) special lien. Banker's lien is a
right available to a banker, where the right extends to all goods in his possession. The
banker's lien is an implied pledge.
The customer may at times have two or more than two accounts in his/her name in the same
capacity for the sake of convenience. The right to combine these accounts of the customer is
known as the right of set-off. The right of set-off is available to the bank without any
agreement to that effect. The right of set-off rests on the bank's discretion. If the banker does
not want to exercise his right, the other party can do so.
Orders which are issued by the courts, for recovery of certain debts, payable by the bank's
customer on behalf of the creditor, are called a garnishee orders. When such orders are issued
by the revenue authorities, viz., income tax or sales tax authorities, they are called attachment
orders. Garnishee orders are of two types: first, garnishee nisi and second garnishee absolute.
Banks are required to pay/attach the amount on getting the order absolute. Banks are required
to observe certain precautions while dealing with the attachment orders.
13.8 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS
Fill in the blanks with the suitable option.
1. Lien is a/an of the creditor to retain possession.
(a) right (b) obligation
(c) instrument (d) interest
2. Particular lien gives the creditor right to retain ---- increase the expenses incurred are not
paid.
(a) all goods (b) ordered goods
(c) some goods/securities (d) specific goods / securities
3. Banker’s lien is an / a
(a) bailment of goods (b) implied pledge
(c) agreement (d) an stoppage
4. Banker's lien is not applicable in case of _
(b) (c)securities left negligently
(d) (d) all of above
(a) safe custody
(b) debts not due
(e) none
5. Right to combine two accounts by banks is called
(a) garnishee (b) lien
(c) set-off (d) rating
6. The right of set-off is a
(a) customer's right (b) banker’s right
(c) bank's discretion (d) payee’s right
7. Garnishee order is issued by a
(a) police officer (b) revenue officer
(c) CID (d) courts of law
8. Attachment order is issued by
(a) income tax officer (b) sales tax officer
(c) both (a) and (b) (d) public debt office
9. Mandate is a agreement.
(a) stamped (b) unstamped
(c) memorandum (d) calculated
10. Power of Attorney can be -------
(a) universal (b) limited
(c) both (a) & (b) (d) calculated
11. Person to whom power of attorney is given is called ----- and who gives it is called ------
(a) debtor-creditor (b) bailor-bailee
(c) pawner-pawnee (d) donor-donee
13.9 ANSWERS TO 'CHECK YOUR PROGRESS'
1. (a), 2. (d), 3. (b), 4. (d), 5. (c), 6. (c), 7. (d), 8. (c), 9. (b), 10. (c), 11. (d).
13.10 KEYWORDS
Lien, General lien, Special lien, Right to set-off, Mandate, Power of attorney, Notary Public,
Garnishee order,
Attachment order, Judgement - debtor, Judgement - creditor.
UNIT
14PAYMENT AND COLLECTION OF CHEQUES AND OTHER NEGOTIABLE
INSTRUMENTS
STRUCTURE
14.0 Objectives
14.1 Introduction
14.2 Negotiable Instruments Act 1881
14.3 Payment in Due Course - Section 10
14.4 Liability of the Paying Bank - Section 31
14.5 Collection of Cheques - Duties of a Collecting Bank
14.6 Endorsement of Cheques
14.6.1 Kind of Endorsements (Sections 15 to 17)
14.7 Forged Instruments
14.8 Bouncing (Dishonour) of Cheques for Insufficiency of Funds
14.9 Return of Cheques
14.9.1 Case Laws on Return of Cheques
14.10 Section 141 - Offences by Companies
14.11 Section 143 - Summary Trial by Court
14.12 Section 144 - Mode of Service of Summons
14.13 Section 145 - Evidence on Affidavit
14.14 Section 146 - Bank's Slip Prima Facie Evidence of Certain Facts
14.15 Section 147 - Offences to be Compoundable
14.16 Let Us Sum Up
14.17 Check Your Progress
14.18 Answers to 'Check Your Progress'
14.19 Keywords
132
14.0 OBJECTIVES
This chapter will enable the reader to have an insight into the various aspects of payment and
collection of cheques.
14.1 INTRODUCTION
A banker is under a statutory obligation to make payment of a cheque drawn on an account, if
there are sufficient funds in the account properly applicable for making payment. Before
doing so, it has to be ensured that the cheque is drawn properly fulfilling various legal
requirements so that the payment will be treated as payment in due course.
14.2 NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT 1881
The Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 deals with three kinds of instruments which are widely
used in commercial transactions. They are promissory notes, bills of exchange and cheque.
Of these instruments, a cheque is used in day to day banking transactions. The Act contains
numerous provisions about cheques.
Definition of Cheque: Section 6 defines a cheque as follows:
A cheque is a bill of exchange drawn on a specified banker and not expressed to be payable
otherwise than on demand and it includes the electronic image of a truncated cheque and a
cheque in the electronic form.
It contains instruction in writing given by the account holder to his bank for payment of
money from his account. The obligation for payment on demand arises only in respect of
savings and current accounts and not in term deposit accounts. There is a statutory obligation
on the part of a banker to make payment of cheque if,
(a) the cheque is properly drawn.
(b) there is sufficient balance in the account.
(c) there is no legal restraint on the bank's duty to pay.
When a cheque is presented for payment, the following aspects should be looked into:
The branch on which it is drawn: Normally, a cheque is presented for payment only at the
branch where the account is maintained. But, nowadays, several banks extend the facility of
multi city cheque facility, whereby the customer can present the cheque at any of its branches
brought under the core banking solution for getting payment. Even then, the customer's
account with the home branch is debited.
Date: A cheque may bear a future date (post-dated), current date or an antedate. If a cheque
bears a date six months prior to the date of presentation, it is considered to be a stale cheque
which cannot be paid without revalidation by the drawer. A post-dated cheque cannot be paid
because in such cases, the bank runs the risk of getting stop payment instructions, death,
insanity or insolvency of drawer, serving of any attachment order before the ostensible date
of the cheque.
Payee: A cheque may be made payable to a single payee or joint payees or alternative payees.
If a cheque is payable to joint payees as X and Y, it should be paid to them jointly. Similarly,
if a cheque is payable to X or Y, it may be paid to either X or Y. Some times banks come
across cheques made payable to cash or order. Such a cheque can be paid only to the drawer
or his agent. If a cheque is drawn payable only to a particular person, say 'X only', it can be
paid to him only and not to any other. If a cheque is payable to a limited company, it cannot
be paid to a third party.
133
Whether order cheque or bearer cheque: An order cheque may be presented for payment
either by the original payee or by the endorsee. In such cases, proper identification of the
presenter should be asked for. Further if the cheque contains endorsements, it must be
ensured that they are regular. A bearer cheque can be paid to any person who presents it. In
such cases, the paying banker need not verify the endorsement. However, the signature of the
presenter should be obtained on the reverse of the cheque for having received the payment.
Whether amount stated in words and figure are the same: Before making payment, it should
be ensured that the amount stated in words and figure tallies. Section 18 of the N.I. Act says
that when the amount stated in words and figure differs, the amount stated in words shall be
paid. But, in practice the banks prefer returning such cheques unpaid with the reason 'amount
in words and figure differs'.
Whether crossed: A cheque may be crossed either generally or specially. According to the
Section 123 of the N.I. Act, when a cheque bears across its face an addition of the words "and
company" or any abbreviation thereof, between two parallel transverse lines or two transverse
lines simply, either with or without the words "not negotiable", that addition shall be deemed
to be a crossing and the cheque shall be deemed to be crossed generally.'
According to the Section 126, when a cheque is crossed generally, the banker on whom it is
drawn shall not pay it otherwise than to a banker. According to Section 129, a banker paying
a cheque crossed generally otherwise than to a banker shall be liable to the true owner of the
cheque for any loss he may sustain owing to the cheque having been so paid. Such a payment
will not be regarded as payment in due course and the banker will lose the protection as given
in Section 128 of the Act.
According to Section 124 of the Act, where a cheque bears across its face an addition of the
name of a banker, either with or without the words 'not negotiable', that addition shall be
deemed to be a crossing and the cheque shall be deemed to be crossed specially and to be
crossed to that banker.
According to Section 126, when a cheque is crossed specially, the banker on whom it is
drawn shall not pay it otherwise than to the banker to whom it is crossed or his agent for
collection. According to Section 129 of the Act, a banker paying a cheque crossed specially
otherwise than to a banker to whom it is crossed or his agent for collection shall be liable to
the true owner of the cheque for any loss he may sustain owing to the cheque having been so
paid. Such a payment will not be regarded as payment in due course and the banker will lose
protection as given in Section 128 of the Act.
According to Section 127 of the Act, where a cheque is crossed specially to more than one
banker, except when crossed to an agent for the purpose of collection, the paying banker shall
refuse payment thereof.
'Account Payee' crossing has not been dealt under the N.I. Act. However, in banking practice
it has significance. This type of crossing is a direction to the collecting banker to the credit of
an account. The collecting bank will not get protection, if it collects the cheque crossed
'Account Payee' for a person other than the person mentioned in the instrument, whether
payable to bearer or order. As per RBI directives, banks should not collect 'Account Payee'
crossed cheques for any person other than the named payee.
Whether the instrument contains any endorsement: According to Section 15 of the N.I. Act,
when the maker or holder of a negotiable instrument signs the same, otherwise than as such
maker, for the purpose of negotiation, on the back or face thereof or on a slip of paper
annexed thereto, he is said to endorse the same.
Though the N.I. Act permits endorsement on the face of the instrument, the practice is only
on the back of it. The slip of paper annexed to the instrument for negotiation is called
'allonge'.
134
A bearer cheque is transferred by the holder by mere delivery. Endorsement is not necessary
in the case of a bearer cheque. The paying banker need not look into endorsements, if any, on
a bearer cheque.
An order cheque can be transferred only by endorsement followed by delivery. According to
Section 16 of N.I. Act, an endorsement may be 'in blank' or 'in full'. If the endorser signs his
name only, it is endorsement in blank. If the endorser signs and adds a direction to pay the
amount to or to the order of specified person, it is then called as an endorsement in full. A
paying banker should look into the regularity of the endorsement before making payment so
that he could avail the protection under Section 85(1) of the N.I. Act, in case, the
endorsement is forged.
Any alteration: According to Section 87 of the N.I. Act, any material alteration of a
negotiable instrument renders the same void as against anyone who is a party thereto at the
time of making such an alteration and does not consent thereto, unless it was made in order to
carry out the common intention of the original parties. Any material alteration should be
authenticated under the full signature of the drawer.
Any mutilation: If a cheque is accidentally torn by the drawer, he may confirm the mutilation
and the cheque can be paid if otherwise in order. When a cheque is accidentally torn by the
collecting banker, it is the practice to put an endorsement as 'Mutilation guaranteed' on the
cheque.
Signature of the drawer: The signature of the drawer on the cheque is an authority given by
the account holder to debit his account with the amount of the cheque. In case, where his
signature is forged, the banker does not get the authority for debiting the account. Though the
N.I. Act provides protection to the paying banker, in case of a forgery of endorsement, it does
not give any protection when the drawer's signature is forged.
Stop-payment instruction: Before making payment of the cheque, the bank should see that
there is no stop payment instruction with respect to the cheque. When the countermanded
cheque is presented for payment, it should be returned with the reason, 'payment
countermanded by the drawer'. In the case of joint accounts, an order for a stop payment
instruction must be given by all the account holders. In the case of partnership accounts,
cancellation of a stop payment instruction must be given by all the partners. In case of limited
companies, cancellation of stop payment instruction must be given by all the persons
authorised to operate the account.
At the time of making payment, the bank should also verify,
• Whether there is sufficient balance in the account.
• There is no order such as a garnishee order, income tax attachment order etc.,
prohibiting payment.
• There is no notice of death, insolvency or insanity of drawer.
14.3 PAYMENT IN DUE COURSE - SECTION 10
Protection is available to the paying banker in case of forgery of endorsement in an order
cheque under Section 85(1), forgery of endorsement in a bearer cheque under section 85(2),
in case of a materially altered cheque under Section 89 and in case of a crossed cheque under
Section 128 of the N.I. Act. In all such cases, the condition for getting protection is that the
payment made of the cheque should be in due course. Section 10 of the N.I. Act defines
payment in due course.
Before making payment of a cheque, the bank should ensure that it is made in due course to
enable it to get protection under the various provisions of the N.I. Act.
'Payment in due course means payment in accordance with the apparent tenor of the
instrument in good faith and without negligence to any person in possession thereof under
circumstances which do not afford a reasonable ground for believing that he is not entitled to
receive payment of the amount therein mentioned.'
135
Now, we discuss in detail the meaning of such words:
1. Apparent tenor means instructions of the drawer of the cheque, which is apparent
from merely looking at the face of the cheque. Such instructions could be the date of
cheque/name of payee/ bearer or order/amount in words and figures, crossing, etc.
2. Good faith and without negligence means the common understood meaning of acting
honestly whether it is done negligently or not. Since good faith alone is not adequate, it
should also be done without negligence. For example, in the deposit slip filled by the
customer, if the a/c number is wrongly stated but the name of the depositor is correctly
written, then if the bank gives credit to some account holder without verifying the name and
account number of the depositor, it is a work
done negligently and hence no protection is available to the banker.
3. Payment to a person in possession means that the banker has to make the payment of
the cheque to the payee of the cheque holder or holder in due course.
4. Entitled to receive payment means that there are no circumstances to doubt the bona
fides of the payee as regards his/her title to the cheque. (P.M. Das vs. Central Bank of India
AIR 1978 Cal.)
14.4 LIABILITY OF THE PAYING BANK - SECTION 31
As per Section 31 of the N.I. Act, the drawee bank is under a liability to honour a cheque
drawn on its account that is having a sufficient balance. Of course, this liability is subject to
the condition that the funds are properly applicable to the payment of the cheque. In case of
default, the bank must compensate the drawer for any loss or damage caused by such default.
Sufficient and adequate funds: Following are the circumstances when funds are sufficient and
adequate, but are not properly applicable.
(a) When payment of a cheque is stopped.
(b) When drawer is dead and its intimation received.
(c) When funds under a garnishee order/income tax officer/sales tax department are
attached.
(d) When the funds are earmarked for specific purposes.
(e) When the funds are set off by the bank.
(f) When the balance is not a clear balance.
Protection available to the paying banker: A paying banker is entitled for protection under the
NI Act in the following cases:
(a) forged endorsements in an order cheque under Section 85(1)
(b) forged endorsements in a bearer cheque under Section 85(2)
(c) forged endorsements in a draft under Section 85(A)
(d) material alteration in a cheque under Section 89
(e) payment of a crossed cheque under Section 128.
Protection in case of forged endorsements in an order cheque: According to Section 85(1),
where a cheque payable to order purports to be endorsed by or on behalf of the payee, the
drawee is discharged by payment in due course. Even though the endorsement on the cheque
is not genuine, the paying banker is protected, provided the endorsement/s is/are regular, the
payment of such cheque is made in due course as per Section 10 of the Act.
The reason for this protection is that the banker cannot be expected to be conversant with the
signature of all the persons, who are not their customers. At the most, what he (the paying
banker) can do is that the endorsement seems (purports) to have been made by the
payee/endorsee.
Protection in case forged endorsements in a bearer cheque: According to Section85(2) , where
a
136
cheque is originally expressed to be payable to bearer, the drawee is discharged by payment
in due course to the bearer thereof, notwithstanding any endorsement appearing on the
instrument.
As a bearer cheque can be negotiated by mere delivery, endorsement is not relevant. Hence, if
the paying banker makes payment to the bearer of the cheque in due course as per Section 10
of the Act, he is discharged even though the cheque contains forged endorsement or
restrictive endorsement.
According to Section 85(A) of the Act, where any draft drawn by one office of a bank upon
another office of the same bank for a sum of money payable to order on demand, purports to
be endorsed by or on behalf the payee, the bank is discharged by payment in due course.
Even though the endorsement on the draft is not genuine, the paying banker is protected
provided,
• The endorsement/s is/are regular.
• The payment of such draft is made in due course as per Section 10 of the Act.
Protection in case of material alteration in a cheque: According to Section 89 of the Act:
when a negotiable instrument has been materially altered, but does not appear to have been so
altered or where a cheque is presented for payment which does not at the time of presentation
appear to be crossed or to have had a crossing, which has been obliterated, the payment
thereof by a person or banker liable to pay and paying the same according to the apparent
tenor thereof at the time of payment and otherwise in due course, shall discharge such [a]
person or banker from all liability thereon and such payment shall not be questioned by the
reason of the instrument having been altered or the cheque crossed.
This section gives protection to the paying banker while making payment of a cheque
containing martial alteration, which was not visible or of a crossed cheque in which the
crossing was not visible at the time of payment, provided the payment was made in according
to the apparent tenor of the instrument and in due course.
Protection in respect of payment of a crossed cheque: Section 128 of N.I. Act gives protection
for the payment of a crossed cheque. When the drawee bank has paid a crossed cheque in due
course, it is entitled to and placed in the same position as if the amount the cheque had been
paid to and received by the true owner thereof.
In order to get protection under this section, the banker should comply with the following
conditions:
• When the cheque is crossed generally, the payment of it must be made only to a
banker.
• When the cheque is crossed specially, the payment of it must be made only to the
banker to whom it is crossed.
• The payment must be made in due course as per Section 10 of the N.I. Act.
Section 129 says 'if a banker makes payment of a cheque crossed generally otherwise than to
a banker or a cheque crossed specially otherwise than to the banker to whom it is crossed or
his agent for collection, being the banker, shall be liable to the true owner of the cheque for
any loss he may sustain owing to the cheque having been so paid.'
14.5 COLLECTION OF CHEQUES - DUTIES OF A COLLECTING BANK
A collecting bank is the one that collects promissory notes, bills, cheques and other similar
instruments like dividend warrant etc., for and on behalf of customers. A collecting banker
may be held liable to the true owner of the cheque for the wrong of conversion, if he collects
a cheque for a person in respect of which he has no title. However, Section 131 of the N.I.
Act gives protection to the collecting banker in this respect if the following conditions are
fulfilled:
• The cheque should have been collected for a customer.
• The cheque should have been crossed either generally or specially before it comes in
to the hands
137
of the banker for collection. If an uncrossed cheque was tendered for collection and after that
if the banker adds crossing, the protection will not be available.
While collecting the cheque, the banker acted in good faith and without negligence.
If these conditions are fulfilled, the collecting banker will not be held liable to the true owner
of the cheque by the reason of only having received such payment. If the 'know your
customer guidelines' have not been followed while opening an account and a cheque is
collected for that account, the protection will not be available.
Section 131 A gives protection to the collecting banker while collecting a draft if the above
conditions are satisfied.
14.6 ENDORSEMENT OF CHEQUES
According to Section 15 of the N.I. Act, when the maker or holder of a negotiable instrument
signs the same, otherwise than as such maker, for the purpose of negotiation, on the back or
face thereof or on a slip of paper annexed thereto, they are said to endorse the same.
14.6.1 Kind of Endorsements (Sections 15 to 17)
1. Endorsement in blank: Mere signature of the endorser on the back of an instrument
without mentioning the name of the specified person in whose favour the endorsement is
made, is called blank endorsement (Section 16). This has the effect of making the cheque
payable to bearer and thereafter the cheque, can be negotiated by mere delivery, since a
bearer cheque is transferred by mere delivery.
2. Endorsement in full: When the endorser makes a direction to pay the amount specified
in the cheque to a certain person or his order then the endorsement is in full (Section 16).
Under this, the endorser guarantees that at the time the cheque left his hands, he had
transferred his rights in a specific person. He also attests that endorsements made prior to this
are genuine.
3. Conditional endorsement: Normally, the endorser binds himself to pay in case of a
dishonour of the instrument. But, when he excludes his liability (without recourse) then the
endorsement is termed as conditional. Similarly, when the right of endorsee to receive the due
on the instrument depends upon happening of a specified event, the endorsement is termed as
conditional. This condition can be a contingent event also, which may or may not happen
(Section 52).
4. Restrictive endorsement - Section 50: The endorsement may restrict or exclude the
right to negotiate or to receive its contents for the use of the endorser is called restrictive
endorsement, e.g. Pay to Nalini Mumbaikar only.
5. Sans Recourse (without liability - Section 52): Endorsement with the express words of
excluding liability of the endorser is called endorsement without recourse or liability, e.g. pay
to Smt. Rameshwari Devi or order without recourse to me.
6. Facultative: As per requirement the endorsee must give a notice of dishonour to the
endorser, but the endorser may waive this right in writing to the endorsement, e.g. pay to Smt.
Manorama or order notice of dishonour waived. The endorser, however, remains liable to the
endorsee for the non-payment of the instrument.
14.7 FORGED INSTRUMENTS
Forged instrument means forging the signature of the drawer and/or endorser, name of the
payee and amount of the instrument etc. Forgery in signature and alterations in payee name,
amount and date are not protected under law. The transferee will not be able to enforce
payment from the parties to the bill, cheque and promissory note. And in case he has obtained
payment by some inadvertence, such payment can be claimed from him/her.
138
This is because of the rule that the forgery gives no title. Thus in the case of a forged
instrument, it is not only that the holder in due course has a defective title but no title at all. In
case such a holder obtains payment, the true owner can sue for recovery of the amount as the
holder would be deemed to be holding the amount for the use of the true owner. The plea of
fraud is good only against the party who is guilty of it or against his transferee who knew the
fraud when he took it. It will not affect the rights of a holder in due course. The same rule
applies to instruments obtained for an unlawful consideration.
Forgery of Drawer's signature: The signature of the drawer on the cheque is an authority
given by the account holder to debit his account with the amount of the cheque. In case where
his signature is forged, the banker does not get authority for debiting the account. It is already
stated that, though the N.I. Act provides protection to the paying banker in case of forgery of
endorsement, it does not give protection when the drawer's signature is forged.
14.8 BOUNCING (DISHONOUR) OF CHEQUES
FOR INSUFFICIENCY OF FUNDS
Negotiable Instrument Act, 1881, was amended in the year 1988 wherein a new chapter was
incorporated ' for penalties in cases of dishonour of a cheque, due to the insufficiency of
funds, in the account of the drawer of the cheque. These provisions were incorporated with a
view to inculcate the culture of the use of cheques and enhancing the 'creditability' of the
instrument. The amendment was again made in the year 2002 by inclusion of new sections.
14.9 RETURN OF CHEQUES
A banker is bound to honour the customer cheques when there are sufficient funds, properly
applicable towards payment available. If a cheque is returned, even when sufficient funds are
available, this dishonour is a breach of contract and may invite legal recourse on the part of
the customer. Due to following reasons, the balance in the customer account is considered not
available or applicable for payment:
(a) Payment is stopped by the customer.
(b) Death of the customer.
(c) Garnishee orders/attachment orders from courts and/or revenue authorities.
(d) Set-off rights to recover debts due to bank from the customer.
Reasons of Return: When a cheque is returned unpaid by the bank for reasons:
(a) Insufficient funds (b) No arrangement
(c) Exceeds arrangement (d) Payment stopped
(e) Refer to drawer (f) Closure of Account by drawer
the cheque is considered to have bounced and the drawer is considered to have committed an
offence. But, when the drawer has intimated the payee that he shall not present the said
cheque without his prior consent, in that event such cases will not fall within the frame of
Sections 138 to 147. Now, we deal these sections as below:
Dishonour of a cheque for insufficiency etc., of funds in the account - Section 138: Where
any cheque drawn by a person on an account maintained by him with a banker for payment of
any amount of money to another person from out of that account for the discharge, in whole
or any part of any debt or other liability is returned by the bank unpaid, either because of that
amount of money is insufficient to honour the cheque or that it exceeds the amount by an
agreement made with that bank; such person shall be deemed to have committed an offence
and without prejudice to any other provision of this Act,
139
be punished with Imprisonment for a term which may be extended to two years or with fine
which may extend to twice the amount of the cheque or with both, provided three things are
done:
(a) the cheque has been presented within 6 months of its validity period,
(b) a demand for payment is made by notice within 30 days of the return of cheque, and
(c) the drawer fails to make payment within 15 days of receipt of notice.
14.9.1 Case Laws on Return of Cheques
(a) Criminal liability cannot be fastened on the heirs or legal representatives (Smt.
Bhupindar Lima vs. State ofAndhra Pradesh (2000)
(b) An offence is committed even if a cheque is returned on account of closure of account
[GVenkataramanaiah vs. Sillakollu Venkateswarlu (1999)]
(c) A cheque can be presented any number of times during the period of its validity (S.
Bhadram vs. M. Sunil Kumar Air 1998 SC)
(d) A post-dated cheque is deemed to have been drawn on the date it bears and the 6
months periods for the purpose are to be reckoned from that date. (N. Sivalingam vs. A.V.
Chandraiyer 1996)
14.10 SECTION 141 - OFFENCES BY COMPANIES
If the person committing an offence is a company, then every person who is responsible for
such offence, as well the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence. Provided
where a person is nominated as a director by virtue of his holding any office or employment
in the Central or State Government or financial corporation, he shall not be liable for
prosecution. Company includes a firm or association of individuals, while director in relation
to a firm means a partner. Once a cause of action has arisen, the limitation will begin to run
and it cannot be stopped by presenting the cheque again, so as to have a fresh cause of action
and fresh limitation (Mis Chahal Engg. and Construction Ltd vs. Verma Plywood Co. 1994).
14.11 SECTION 143 - SUMMARY TRIAL BY COURT
All offence under Sections 138/141 shall be tried by a Judicial Magistrate or by Metropolitan
Magistrate of the first class and the provision of Sections 262 to 265 of Code of Criminal
Procedure shall apply to such trials. In the case any conviction in a summary trial under this
section, it shall be lawful for the magistrate to pass a sentence of imprisonment for a term not
exceeding one year and an amount of fine not exceeding Rs. 5,000.
14.12 SECTION 144 - MODE OF SERVICE OF SUMMONS
The magistrate issuing summons to an accused or a witness may direct a copy of summons to
be served by speed post or by such courier services as are approved by a Court of Session.
14.13 SECTION 145 - EVIDENCE ON AFFIDAVIT
Evidence of the complaint may be given by him on affidavit and may subject to all just
exceptions be read in evidence in any enquiry; trial.
14.14 SECTION 146 - BANK'S SLIP PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF CERTAIN FACTS
The court shall on production of the bank's slip or memo, having thereon the official mark
denoting that the cheque has been dishonoured, presume the fact of dishonour of such cheque
unless and until such fact is disapproved.
140
14.15 SECTION 147 - OFFENCES TO BE COMPOUNDABLE
Every offence punishable under this Act shall be compoundable. Case Law: Sadanandan
Bhadran vs. M. Sunil Kumar 1998 4 CLJ
Payee of a cheque cannot initiate prosecution for an offence under Section 138 for its
dishonour for the second time, if he had not initiated such prosecution on the earlier cause of
action.
14.16 LET US SUM UP
The Negotiable Instrument Act, 1881, discusses about negotiable instruments and the
payment, collection, dishonour, rights and duties of collecting bankers. As per the N.I. Act,
negotiable instrument means cheques, bills of exchange and promissory notes. But there are
other instruments also viz., Govt. Promissory Note, Shah Jog Hundi, railway receipts, motor
transport receipts, dividend warrants as per custom of trade.
Underlying the banker-customer relationship is the contractual obligation on the part of the
banker to honour the customer's cheque as and when they are presented provided, of course,
certain conditions are satisfied before payment is made by banker. Legally, the bank is not
bound to collect cheques/bills etc., drawn upon other banks and parties, for its customer.
However, collection of cheques/bills is an important function of the bank, because it provides
the facility in respect of crossed cheques.
Conversion means wrongful or unlawful interference with another person's property which is
not consistent with the owner's right of possession. A banker, if he collects a cheque for a
customer having no title or defective title to the instrument is said to have committed
conversion. A bank which has in good faith and without negligence received payment of a
cheque, crossed generally or specially to itself for a customer shall not, in case the title to the
cheque proves defective, incur any liability to the true owner of the cheque by reason only of
having received such payment. When the drawer or holder of a cheque draws two parallel
transverse lines on the face of the cheque with or without words '& Co' or 'Not negotiable' it
is called general crossing. Similarly, when the name of the bank is inserted, it is called special
crossing and the paying banker should pay such cheques only to the bank whose name
appears between the crossed lines.
When a holder of the negotiable instrument signs for the purpose of negotiation on the back
or face thereof, the person so doing is called endorser and the transfer is called endorsement.
The effect of endorsement is that the property stands transferred to the endorsee, for further
negotiation/payment. Negotiation is possible even though the word 'order' is absent.
Endorsements appearing upon a negotiable instrument are deemed to be similar in the order
in which they appear thereon - (Section 118).
Forged endorsement is not a separate kind of endorsement. It is an unauthorised endorsement,
which is made over the instrument by one who is not the endorsee. Instrument is sometimes
obtained by theft, forgery, fraud and unlawful consideration. Such negotiable instruments can
be bearer or order. The transferee will not be able to enforce payment because the forgery
gives no title.
14.17 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS
1.Payment in 'due course' means
(a) on due date(b) in accordance with apparent tenor
(c) in accordance with apparent signature and specimen
(d) due to sufficient funds.
2.Payment of cheques is governed by sections under N.I. Act
(a) Section 10/31/85/126 (b) Section 15/16/17/131
141
© Section 131/138/147/142 (d) None of the above
(e) All (i) to (iv)
3. The liability of drawee of cheque is to make payment, when there is availability of
(a) Sufficient funds (b) Properly applicable for payment
(c) Required so by drawer (d) All of above
(e) None
4. Crossing in a cheque
(a) may be on the face or back of cheque
(b) must always be between two parallel transverse line
(c)must be on the face of cheque
(d)can be cancelled by drawer as per N.I. Act.
5.Promissory Notes/Bills of Exchange and Cheque are defined as
(a) trust Receipts (b) judicial documents
(c) negotiable instruments (d) documents of title to goods
6. Cheque is payable on
(a) demand (b) usance
(c) fixed future date (d) after sight
7. Crossing is a direction to the
(a) drawer (b) payee
(c) paying (d) passing
(e) collecting
8. One of the following crossings is not provided for, in the N.I. Act
(a) account payee crossing (b) not negotiable crossing
(c) general crossing (d) special crossing
9. Acts done honestly are called acts done
(a) without negligence(b) rashly
(c) mollified (d) in good faith
(e) honourly
10. When the holder of an order cheque signs on the back of it, without specifying the
person to whom the amount is to be paid, it is called
(a) full endorsement (b) partial endorsement
(c) conditional endorsement (d) restrictive endorsement
(e) blank endorsement
11. Sans recourse means
(a) without fear (b) without physical touch
(c) without liability to me (d) without liability to payee
12. A bank on whom a cheque is drawn by the customer is
(a) collecting bank (b) paying bank
(c) advising bank (d) issuing bank
(e) confirming bank
13. Section 131 of N.I. Act extends protection to the
(a) collecting bank (b) paying bank
(c) drawee bank (d) negotiating bank
14. Where a customer, by a letter has advised the bank directing the banker not to
honour/pay a oarticular cheaue such letter is called---------
142
(a) letter of credit (b) stop payment letter
(c) mandate (d) garnishee letter
(e) official letter
15. Forged cheque is a.
(a) valid (b) invalid
(c) post-dated (d) stale-cheque
(e) ante-dated
14.18 ANSWERS TO 'CHECK YOUR PROGRESS'
1. (b), 2. (a), 3. (d), 4. (c), 5. (c), 6. (a), 7. (c), 8. (a), 9. (d), 10. (e), 11. (c), 12. (b), 13. (a), 14.
(b), 15. (b).
14.19 KEYWORDS
Paying Banker, Collecting Banker, Payment in Due Course, Holder, Holder in Due Course,
Conversion, Negotiable Instruments, Promissory Note, Cheque, Crossing, Special Crossing,
Endorsement.
OPENING ACCOUNTS OF VARIOUS TYPES OF CUSTOMERS
STRUCTURE
15.0 Objectives
15.1 Introduction
15.2 Minor Accounts
15.3 Joint Account Holders
15.4 Hindu Undivided Family (HUF)
15.5 Opening of a Partnership Firm Account
15.6 Opening of Accounts of Limited Companies
15.7 Opening of an Account for Trusts
15.8 Opening of Accounts of Cooperative Societies
15.9 Opening Account for Government and Public Bodies
15.10 Summary
15.11 Check Your Progress
15.12 Answers to 'Check Your Progress'
15.13 Keywords
144
15.0 OBJECTIVES
A study of this unit will help you to understand the various types of depositors and borrowers,
also the rules governing the opening of account and their operations.
15.1 INTRODUCTION
A banker deals with different types of customers like Individuals, partnership firms,
companies, co¬operative societies etc. While opening and in the conduct of accounts of these
persons, the banker has to comply with the law applicable to each of them.
There are certain types of depositors/borrowers, which are different from individuals or
proprietary accounts requiring some care and attention not only while opening such accounts
but even thereafter. Every person is legally capable of opening an account with a banker
provided the bank is satisfied with his bona fides and the banker is willing to enter into the
business relations with him.
15.2 MINOR ACCOUNTS
According to the Indian Majority Act, 1875, every person domiciled in India, including a
minor for whom, a guardian for the person or property is appointed by a court, attains the age
of majority on his/ her completing the age of 18 years. As per Section 11 of the Indian
Contract Act, 1872, "when the age of maturity has been provided by law to be 18 years, any
person less than that age, even by a day, would be a minor in law". It further states that "every
person is competent to contract who is of the age of maturity according to the law he is
subject and who is of sound mind and is not disqualified from contracting by any law to
which he is subject." The essence of this is that a minor is not competent to enter into a
contract. This affects his capacity to hold, acquire or dispose of property. A contract for the
supply of the necessities of life, as per status of the party, to a minor, is a valid contract. In the
same way, a minor can also recover money from others, if advanced, since a minor can be a
beneficiary. In case of all other contracts, a minor may repudiate his promise or consent.
With a view to inculcating the habit of thrift and savings, banks, however, allow minors
above the age of 10 years to open and operate deposit accounts, subject to certain conditions
attached to such accounts. Opening of minor's accounts needs completion of certain
formalities, viz., Introduction from an existing account holder or identification, identity, age
and residence proof and ID Card from the school etc.
Operation by guardian/minor self: Usually, the account should be operated by the guardian on
behalf of the minor, whose date of birth and the date of attaining majority recorded in the
ledger account. After attaining majority, the guardian is not allowed to operate the account
any further, without confirmation from the minor (who is now a major). Section 26 of the N.I.
Act provides that a minor may draw, endorse, deliver and negotiate a negotiable instrument
and as such, a minor can draw a cheque. Ordinarily, balances in such accounts are subject to a
maximum amount and age of the minor should be above 13 years. No overdraft is allowed in
these accounts. The minor should be literate. Two minors cannot open a joint account. The
father is the natural guardian for opening the account, but RBI has authorised the mother also
to sign as a guardian (except in case of Muslim minors).
Rules for Operations
If the guardian dies during the minority, then the balance can be paid to the minor after his
attaining majority. If the minor account holder dies, the balance is payable to the natural
guardian, as he becomes the absolute owner of it. In the case of a married minor girl, her
husband, if a major, shall be the natural guardian, while in other cases the father or mother is
the natural guardian. The term natural guardian does not include stepmother or stepfather.
145
15.3 JOINT ACCOUNT HOLDERS
A joint account is an account opened by two or more persons. While opening the account, an
account-opening form should be signed by all the account holders. Instructions for operating
the account may be any one of the following:
(a) either or survivor (b) both jointly (c) former or survivor.
In the absence of any instruction for operating the account, the operation will be by all the
account holders jointly. If any change is required in operational instructions by any one or
more of the account holders or if anyone or more of the account holders desire to revoke the
instructions already given, such modification or revocation of the instructions already on
record should be signed by all the account holders. However, any of them can stop the
payment of a cheque issued by any other joint account holder. The instructions for operations
in the account will stand countermanded in cases of insanity, insolvency, death of any of the
joint holders and operations in the account will be stopped.
Rules for Claim of Account
(a)On the death of any of the joint account holders, the survivors are entitled to the whole
amount.
(b)Nomination can be entertained for payments of balance in the case of death of all the joint
account holders.
(c) No right of set off can be exercised in the case of a joint account for the amounts due to
the bank in an individual capacity.
(d)A deposit made by a Hindu of his money jointly with his wife or any other person, payable
to either or survivor, does not, on his death, constitute a gift by him to the other person. The
deposit amount in the absence of anything to the contrary, should be presumed to belong to
the husband and should therefore pass on to the legal heirs of the husband, including the wife
who is the survivor.
15.4 HINDU UNDIVIDED FAMILY (HUF)
In a HUF, the business is inheritable. Where a Hindu dies, leaving a business, it passes on to
the legal heirs. If he leaves male children, it descends to them and the property becomes a
HUF property. The members of the family are called coparceners and eldest male child is the
manager or the Karta. When an account is opened in the name of a HUF, all the adult
members have to sign even though the Karta would operate on the account. When the
business is ancestral, the coparceners are liable to the extent of their share in the family
property and no personal liability.
Rules for Operations
(a)The Karta has an implied authority to avail loan and execute the necessary documents. To
be on a safer side, the loan documents should be signed by all the adult male members.
(b)The Karta has the power to transfer an asset, provided it is made for a legal necessity or
for the benefit of the estate.
(c)The burden of proving legal necessity rests with the transferee.
(d)Names of male minor coparceners should be kept on record and their guardians must sign
the documents on their behalf.
(e) Withdrawal of one of the coparceners does not put the existence of the firm in jeopardy.
(f) While opening the account and on the cheques issued, the use of the word HUF is
essential along with the name of the unit in order to give notice to the public that the drawer
is signing for the HUF and not for the personal assets. The account is operated by the Karta
(Head of the family). If it consists of various branches, the other major male cparcnors are
allowed to operate on the accounts.
146
15.5 OPENING OF A PARTNERSHIP FIRM ACCOUNT
Section 4 of the Indian Partnership Act, 1932 defines a partnership as a relationship
subsisting between persons who have agreed to share the profits of a business carried on by
all or any of them acting for all. Registration of a partnership is optional except in the states
of Gujarat and Maharashtra where it is compulsory.
Rules for Opening of a Firm's Account
(a)While opening an account, the partnership letter should be signed by all the major partners,
stating the nature of business, names and addresses of all partners along with operative
instructions as to who will operate the account.
(b)In case of any internal dispute among partners, if any of them gives notice of stoppage of
operation, then the account would only be operative by all partners jointly.
(c)Partners are mutual agents and can bind the firm by their acts. It applies to sleeping or
secret partner also. (Case Law: M.M. Abbas Bros, and Others vs. Chetandas Fatehchand Air
1979 Mad.)
(d)When the powers of management restricts the rights of other partners and is entrusted in
one partner, could it be called a partnership? Yes. [Case Law: K.D. Kamath Co. vs. C.I.T.
1972 ITR(SC)]
When there is an addition into the partnership, the old account can be continued, if the
balance in the account is in credit. But when there is a debit balance, the old account should
be closed and a new account should be opened to avoid operation of the Clayton's Rule,
which states that the first item on debit side is discharged by the first item on credit side and
so on chronologically. The liability is thus crystallised and future credits are not adjusted
against old liabilities/dues.
(a) The rule that the partner is the agent of the firm for the purpose of the business of the
firm, cannot be applied to all transactions and dealings between the partners themselves,
where two of the partners of a firm executed a promissory note in favour of the third partner,
agreeing to pay him a certain sum due to him, it was held that the remaining partners are not
bound. (Hoshiar Singh vs.Udairam AIR 1929.)
(b) Death of a partner dissolves the partnership firm automatically, in the absence of
anything to the contrary. In order to determine the liability of the deceased partner, the banker
should close the account of the firm and secure a letter of administration from the court. The
account would henceforth be styled as for "R.K. Dhoble (deceased) Ritesh Mittal executor
(administrators)."
Retirement of a partner needs stoppage of the bank account operations because the liability of
the retiring partner towards the bank and third parties ceases, if a public notice is given in a
local newspaper in respect of transactions undertaken subsequent to the date of retirement. A
new account should be opened.
15.6 OPENING OF ACCOUNTS OF LIMITED COMPANIES
Company is a legal entity and can open accounts in the same way as any other person. There
are three types of Limited Companies: (i) Public Ltd. (ii) Private Ltd. (iii) Government
company.
(a)Public Ltd. - It has to have a minimum of 7 members and a maximum of unlimited
members, with a minimum paid-up capital of Rs. 5 Lakh - Section 3 (i) (iv) of the Companies
Act, 1956.
(b) Private Ltd. - It has to have a minimum of 2 members and maximum of 50 with a paid-up
share capital of Rs.l Lakh. Maximum number does not include members who are in
employment of the company. For banking business, maximum numbers allowed is 20 -
Section 3 (i) (iii) of the Companies Act, 1956.Government Companies - where fifty one per
cent of the shares are held by the government. The word 'limited' is not required to follow the
company's name in such companies.
147
Rules for Opening Account and Operations
The company should furnish the following for opening of accounts with banks:
(a) Certified copies of memorandum and articles of association and certificate of
incorporation.
(b) Names of directors of the company as stated in the Articles.
(c) For Public Ltd. Company, a copy of certificate of commencement of business issued
by ROC.
(d) Copy of resolution appointing the bank as company's bank and names of the person
authorised to operate the account.
(e) The specimen signatures of all authorised officials who would operate account.
(f) Copies of the balance sheet in case of existing companies.
The company should ensure that
(a) it authorises its employee to collect cash payments.
(b) In order to avoid frauds and operational difficulties, there should be a minimum three
persons at a time, to operate the account.
It may also be noted that
(a) Death of the authorised signatories does not demand the stopping of payments, since
the company is in existence.
(b) Ltd. Co. doing trading has implied powers to borrow, while a non-trading company is
required to specify it in its Memo/Articles.
(c) Introduction is not necessary for opening a company account.
(d) A cheque, payable to the company should never be deposited in the personal account
of directors, as it would amount to negligence under Section 131 of N.I. Act 1881.
15.7 OPENING OF AN ACCOUNT FOR TRUSTS
A trust is an obligation annexed to the ownership of a property, arising out of confidence
reposed in and accepted by the person for the benefit of another or of another owner. The
person who reposes or declares confidence is called the author of the trust. The person who
accepts the confidence is called the trustee. The person for whose benefit, the confidence is
accepted is called the beneficiary. The instrument by which the trust is created is called the
'Trust Deed'.
Rules for Opening of Account and Operations
(a) Copy of the trust deed is to be examined to ascertain the powers and functions of the
trustees.
(b) In the case of two or more trustees, unless specifically stated in the trustdeed, all the
trustees will operate the account jointly.
(c) On the death of one or more trustee(s), the authority will be vested in the remaining
trustees. When all the trustees are dead or retired, new trustees will be appointed by the court.
(d) The insolvency of the trustee is not the insolvency of the trust.
(e) Trustee(s) cannot delegate his/their powers, unless specifically authorised by the trust
deed.
(f) Charitable trusts are required, in several states in India, to be registered with the
charity commissioner or such authority under the Public Trust Act. A copy of the registration
certificate should first be obtained, before opening such an account.
15.8 OPENING OF ACCOUNTS OF COOPERATIVE SOCIETIES
(a) Rules and bye laws are to be examined to ascertain if there are any restrictions on opening
of a bank account with the commercial banks.
(b) Some states have restrictions as to opening a bank account other than with the co-
operative banks,
148
without permission from Ihe Registrar of Co-operative Societies and with certain conditions.
These conditions like maximum balances etc., should be observed by the bank.
(c) Investment of funds can be made with any bank or person carrying the business of
banking -
approved for this purpose by the Registrar (Section 32 the Cooperative Societies Act, 1912).
(d) Resolution to open a bank account with the signatures of three persons, viz.,
president/secretary/
treasurer out of these three, signatures of the president and one of the others are essential.
15.9 OPENING ACCOUNT FOR GOVERNMENT AND PUBLIC BODIES
The central government transactions are governed by the Central Government Compilation of
Treasury Rules and Account Codes. The state government transactions are governed by the
State Financial Handbook of that state. The main function of banks in conducting government
business consists of paying, receiving, collecting and remitting money on behalf of the
government departments. Banks, while opening the accounts of government and public
bodies, should also obtain a copy of the letter of authority issued by the competent authority
for opening the account.
Receipts
The receipt is through challans made in duplicate or triplicate as required, showing distinctly
the nature of payment and the head of account to which the amount is to be credited. The
challan must be passed by the treasury/sub-treasury before presenting for payment. Passed
challans are valid for ten days after which they will have to be revalidated. Copies of challans
returned to the depositor as receipts should be signed in full. In case a challan is lost, no
duplicate is issued, but only a certificate is to be issued.
Payments
The government departments are authorised to issue cheques within the drawing limit
permitted to them. Self-drawings in cash are allowed for salary and expenses. Special Cheque
books are used by the government departments. They are supplied by the department and are
paid for by the banks. No overdraft is to be allowed in these accounts. The credit to these
accounts is received through budget allocations by the respective ministries. Refund orders
are issued by the central excise and customs department in favour of payees. Refund orders
are also issued by the income tax department with a related advice. While paying, the banks
should have cheques as well as advice at the time of payment. Advice is also received by the
payee along with the cheques. Such refund orders are quasi-negotiable and do not attract any
stamped discharge.
Opening of Personal Deposit Account by Government Departments
There are certain government departments like forest, local funds etc., as authorised by the
A.G. office where cheques are drawn by the authorised official in these departments and
presented at the bank directly for payment without the intervention of the treasury. Such
accounts are opened as current accounts. Details like authority for opening account, cheque
books issued, person authorised to draw cheques, drawing limits etc., are noted. The cheques
issued are valid only for three months. The validity of three months ends at the end of the
calendar month. Government officials are also authorised to open accounts in their personal
names for disbursement etc. Such accounts are opened and closed by the official after the
purpose is served.
15.10 SUMMARY
Banks open accounts of all individuals, institutions, co-operative societies, trusts and
government departments. They also open special types of accounts.
Such accounts are: (a) Minor's account for those above 10 years of age.
149
(b) Joint accounts with different operational instructions, viz., either or survivor, former
or survivor, jointly.
(c) Accounts of Hindu undivided family with Karta operating the account. All the major
male members' signatures are obtained and on the death of the Karta, the next in line is
considered as Karta of the HUF
(d) Partnership accounts are opened and the existing accounts become inoperative/closed
due to admission/retirement/death of any partner.
(e) Accounts of limited companies can be opened with copies of memorandum/articles of
association/ balance sheets/certificate of incorporation/certificate of commencement of
business and resolution to open new account in a bank.
(f) Trust accounts are opened with trust deed/certificate of registration issued by the
Charity Commissioner/resolutions to open a/c.
(g) Cooperative societies can also open bank accounts with public/private banks other
than banks. Permission cooperative is required from registrars of cooperative societies with
maximum ceiling on balances.
(h) Bank accounts are also opened for government/public bodies for receiving monies and
payments on behalf of concerned departments.
15.11 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS
1. Introduction in opening accounts is
(a) Optional (b) Compulsory
(c) Discretionary (d) Waived from year 2003.
2. A minor for whom the court has appointed a guardian attains majority on completion
of
(a) 21 years (b) 18 years
(c) 15 years (d) 17 years.
3. The minimum number of members in a public limited company is
(a) 50 (b) 20 (c) 10 (d) 7 (e) no limit.
4. Government companies are those companies where the government holds at
least---------- shares.
(a) 51 per cent(b) 26 per cent
(c) 100 per cent (d) No such requirement
5. Delegation of powers under a trust is
(a) Possible (b) Not possible
(c) Beneficiary's permission (d) Charity commissioner's permission.
6. Which document stipulates internal rules of a company ?
(a) Memorandum (b) Resolution
(c) Articles (d) Declaration
(e) Companies Act, 1956.
7. Minor's account can be opened in the guardianship of
(a) Mother and Father(b) Mother or Father
(c) Grandmother (d) Elder brother.
8. Two or more minors if desirous of opening a bank a/c in your bank, whether they can
open
(a) Either or Survivor (b) Jointly
(c) Only two can join (d) Cannot open.
9. A Hindu minor having a natural guardian attains majority on completion of
(a) 18 years (b) 21 years (c) 13 years
(d) 13 years provided he has power of understanding.
150
10. Who shall be natural guardian in case of married minor girl?
(a) Father (b) Mother
(c) Father-in-law (d) Mother-in-law
(e) Husband
11. Sanjay, a minor aged 11 years, desires to open a saving account. His mother is
illiterate and his father has become sanyasi. He has his grand parents. Who will be his natural
guardian?
(a) Father (b) Mother
(c) Grand father (d) Guardian appointed by court
(e) Sanjay himself can operate.
12. In a limited Co. certificate of incorporation was obtained though the memorandum
was signed by two persons for all the seven signatories where the signatures were forged.
Will the bank accept memo as genuine for opening bank a/c?
(a) Yes(b) No
(c) Yes because incorporation certificate is valid
(d)No because forged documents cannot be accepted
(e)Bank will ask its H.G.
13. There should be two persons to open a partnership account in a bank. Which of the
following is correct?
(a) X aged 25 years Y aged 17 years (b) X aged 25 years Y aged 21 years
(c) X aged 17 years and Y aged 16 years
(d)Ku. Shubha aged 30 years and Ku. Rachna aged 16 years (daughter of Ku. Shubha)
(e)X aged 71 years Y aged 57 years but lunatic.
14. HUF account is to be opened in a bank where there are three major persons
Shivkumar - Father; Mrs. Ramawati - Shivkumar's Mother, Sharat Kumar - Son; Who can
become Karta of HUF?
(a) Shivkumar (b) Sharat Kumar
(c) Mrs. Ramawati (d) Both Shivkumar and Ramawati
(e) Both Shivkumar and Sharat Kumar.
15. One of the directors of a Ltd. Co. expired and cheques signed by him are presented for
payments should the bank pay those cheques?
(a) Cannot pay(b) Company on other directors confirmation
(c) Can pay as a routine (d) Payments be stopped by Co.
16. X a partner in the firm xyz Co. wants to open a bank account in the firm's name. Does
it require signatures of
(a) All partners (b) Anyone
(c) Managing partner only (d) Sleeping partner not required.
15.12 ANSWERS TO CHECK YOUR PROGRESS'
1. (b), 2. (b), 3. (d), 4. (a), 5. (b), 6. (c), 7. (b), 8. (d), 9. (a), 10. (e), 11. (b), 12. (c), 13. (b), 14.
(a), 15. (c), 16. (a).
15.13 KEYWORDS
Minor, HUF, Joint Accounts, Partnership deed. Payable to either or survivor, former or
survivor, Jointly operative, Limited companies, Resolution, Memorandum and Articles of
Association, Certificate of incorporation, Trustdeed, Clayton's rule.
ANCILLARY SERVICES
STRUCTURE
16.0 Objectives
16.1 Remittances: Introduction
16.2 Demand Drafts (DD) and Bankers' Cheque (BC)
16.2.1 Issuance of a Duplicate DD/BC
16.3 Mail Transfer (MT)
16.4 Telegraphic Transfer (TT)
16.5 Traveller's Cheques (TC)
16.6 National Electronic Funds Transfer System (NEFT)
16.7 Real Time Gross Settlement System (RTGS)
16.8 Safe Deposit Lockers
16.8.1 Aspects Governing Locker
16.8.2 Nomination for Safety Locker
16.8.3 Important Guidelines of RBI on Lockers
16.9 Portfolio Management
16.10 Summary
16.11 Check Your Progress
16.12 Answers to 'Check Your Progress'
16.13 Keywords
152
16.0 OBJECTIVES
A study of this unit will help you to learn more about the various ancillary services rendered
by banks.
16.1 REMITTANCES: INTRODUCTION
Remittance means transfer of funds from one branch of a bank to another branch of the same
bank or a different bank. Customers can make local remittances through banker's cheques and
remit funds from one centre to another through demand drafts, telegraphic transfers, national
electronic funds transfer (NEFT) and real time gross settlement (RTGS) at specified service
charges.
Each transaction of remittance is based on an application in the prescribed form available at
the branch of remittance. The customers shall fill in full particulars regarding the remittance,
such as nature of remittance, i.e. by DD/TT/MT/BC, name and address of the beneficiary,
name of the place to which the remittance is to be made, name, address and account number
(if any) of the purchaser/remitter.
16.2 DEMAND DRAFTS (DP) AND BANKERS' CHEQUE (BC)
The most common mode of funds transfer - the demand draft/banker's cheque system is paper
based. Application for purchase of demand draft/banker's cheque may be made by a duly
filled in form, signed by the applicant (with address), giving full particular of the draft
intended to be purchased.
A DD/BC is a negotiable instrument and is made payable to order of the beneficiary.
Banker's cheques and drafts are valid for three and six months respectively and can be
revalidated by the issuing branches on a written request of the purchasers. The drafts can be
revalidated only once within one year from the date of issue. After one year of the draft being
purchased, it can be cancelled at the issuing branch and a fresh draft can be obtained after
paying the requisite service charges. Refund on cancellation of a DD/BC shall be made only
if the original instrument is tendered without any sign of an endorsement or any special
crossing or negotiations having been made. All refunds are subject to the establishment of the
proper identity of the purchaser to the satisfaction of the bank.
Purchaser of a DD/BC has no authority to countermand its payment after it has been
delivered to the payee. However, the bank shall exercise caution if the purchaser of a DD/PO
reports a loss or theft of the instrument, if the payment has not already been made. All such
intimation shall have to be made in writing at the branch from where the DD/BC was
purchased.
The issue and payment of the banker's cheques and drafts in cash across the counter is subject
to Income Tax provisions and RBI rules against money laundering activities.
Purchase/payment of drafts/ BC for Rs. 50,000 and above are to be made through banking
channels and not in cash with exceptions like Govt. accounts.
16.2.1 Issuance of a Duplicate DD/BC
A customer is entitled to the issuance of a duplicate DD/BC in place of the lost instrument
and the same will be subject to:
(a)intimation to the bank
(b)payment of DD/BC has not been already made by the drawee bank/branch.
(c)execution of an indemnity letter signed by both the payee and the purchaser in the
prescribed form duly .stamped
(d)payment of the prevalent service charges for issuance of such duplicate instruments.
16.3 MAIL TRANSFER (MT)
A mail transfer is a form of remittance in which the amount remitted by a customer or a non-
customer
153
is directly credited to the account of the beneficiary with another branch. Drawee branches
afford credit of mail transfer to customer's account within a maximum period of seven days
from the date of receipt of funds. The concept of mail transfer has no relevance when the
remitting branch and the receiving branch are brought under core banking solution. The mail
transfer is sent by the issuing branch directly to the drawee branch on the same day by post.
16.4 TELEGRAPHIC TRANSFER (TT)
A telegraphic transfer is a form of remittance, which is advised by telegram, telex or fax
machine. The fundamental principles of such a transfer are otherwise identical with the mail
transfer. Drawee branches afford credit of telegraphic transfer to a customer's account within
a maximum period of 2 days from the date of deposit of funds for TT. Normally, Inward
telegraphic transfers shall be credited on receipt of the telegram or the confirmation thereof
whichever is earlier.
16.5 TRAVELLER'S CHEQUES (TC)
Traveller's cheques are issued in pre-printed denominations. TCs are issued to any Individual
and the purchaser has to sign on the TCs in the space provided for in the presence of bank
officials at the time of purchase. The TCs have an unrestricted validity period. At the time of
encashment, purchaser is required to countersign each TC in the presence of branch officials
at the space provided. Identification of the purchaser is not insisted on by the bank and
payment is made once the signature tallies with the one already appearing on the cheque.
16.6 NATIONAL ELECTRONIC FUNDS TRANSFER SYSTEM (NEFT)
The Reserve Bank has introduced a system called "The Reserve Bank of India National
Electronic Funds Transfer System" which is referred to as NEFT System. The transactions
under this system may be made for amounts inclusive of paisa component when there is no
upper value limit for putting through an individual NEFT transaction. The system facilitates
an efficient, secure, economical, reliable and expeditious system of funds transfer and
clearing in the banking sector. The NEFT system also relieves the stress on the existing paper
based funds transfer and clearing system. The remitting branch prepares a structured financial
messaging solution (SFMS) message and sends it to its service centre for NEFT. The RBI at
the clearing centre sorts the transactions bank-wise and prepares the accounting entries of net
debit or credit for passing on to the banks participating in the system.
16.7 REAL TIME GROSS SETTLEMENT SYSTEM (RTGS)
RTGS is an electronic payment environment where payment instructions are processed on a
'continuous' or 'REAL TIME' basis and settled on a 'GROSS' or 'individual' basis without
netting the debits against credits. The payments so effected are 'final' and 'irrevocable'
settlement is done in the books of the central bank - the ultimate liquidity depository of the
country. The RTGS system allows transfer of funds across banks on a nearly instantaneous
basis. Each participant bank will be required to open a dedicated settlement account for
putting through its RTGS transactions. Not only does it allow transfer of funds, it also
reduces the credit risk. Both customers and banks can transfer monies the same day in various
cycles, compared with cheques, which are cleared a day or two later. Readers will know more
about the RTGS system in a separate chapter on EFT Systems.
16.8 SAFE DEPOSIT LOCKERS
Safe deposit locker is a facility extended to the customers to enable them to keep their
valuables/ documents etc. in a specially designed locker on payment of prescribed rentals.
154
16.8.1 Aspects Governing Locker
A locker may be hired by an individual (not minor), firms, limited companies, specified
associations and societies etc. Nomination facility is available to an individual hirer of safe
deposit locker. Lockers are available in different sizes, i.e. small, medium, large and extra
large with varying rents. Lockers are rented out for a minimum period of one year. Rent is
payable in advance. In case of overdue rent, banks will charge a penalty. Standing
instructions can be accepted for transfer of rent from a savings/current accounts. The bank
will hire a locker only to properly introduced persons. Loss of key should be immediately
informed to the branch. Banks normally reserve the right to break open the locker, if the rent
is not paid in spite of giving notice as per bank's rules and recover their charges thereof.
16.8.2 Nomination for Safety Locker
Section 45 of the Banking Regulation Act deals with the nomination for lockers.
In the case of a sole hirer of a safety locker, nomination can be made in favour of only one
individual. Where the safe deposit locker is hired from the bank by two or more individuals
jointly, nomination can be made by them in favour of one or more persons.
Only the locker hirers can make a change in or cancel the nomination in case of safety
lockers hired by two individuals jointly. Where the safety locker is hired in the name of a
minor, the nomination shall be made by a person lawfully entitled to act on behalf of the
minor.
16.8.3 Important Guidelines of RBI on Lockers
(a) The KYC (Know Your Customer) assessment for the safe-deposit locker customers
(either new or existing) should be done at least to the levels prescribed for medium risk or the
risk categories attributable to their bank account, if higher.
(b) Where the lockers have remained non-operational for more than one and three years
for high- and medium-risk categories respectively, banks should immediately contact the
locker-hirers and advise them to operate the lockers or surrender the lockers even if the rent is
being paid regularly. In case the locker-hirers still do not operate the locker, banks should
consider opening the lockers with help of the police after giving due notice to the locker-
hirers.
(c) Banks should have an explicit policy for taking appropriate action including breaking
open the lockers in cases where the rents are not paid by the locker-hirers.
Access to locker (with survivor/nominee clause)
(a)In case of death of a sole locker-hirer (where there is nomination), access to locker may be
given to the nominee. In such cases, except for the death certificate and identification of
nominee, no other document is required.
(b)In case of death of one of the hirers, where there are joint locker-hirers and as per the
contract of locker hire, the locker has to be operated jointly, and where there is nomination,
access to the locker may be given to the nominee jointly with the surviving hirer(s). In such
cases, except for the death certificate and identification of nominee, no other document is
required.
(c)Where both/all the joint locker hirer(s) die and where there is nomination, access to the
locker may be given to the nominee(s). In such cases, except for the death certificate and
identification of the nominee(s), no other document is required.
(a) Where there are joint locker-hirers having a contract of hire with survivorship clause
such as 'either or survivor', 'anyone or survivor' etc., but the locker is not to be operated
jointly, access to the locker may be given only to the survivor in case of death of one of the
hirers.
Access to locker (without the survivor/nominee clause)
(a) In case of the death of a sole locker-hirer (where there is no nomination) and there is a
valid will, access may be given to the executor/administrator. In other cases, access may be
given to the legal
155
representative of the deceased. In such cases, a death certificate and proof of legal
representation is required.
(b) Where there are joint locker-hirers and as per the contract of locker hire, the locker is
to be operated jointly, and where there is no nomination, if one of the hirers die, access to the
locker may be given to the survivor jointly with the legal heirs (or the executor/administrator,
if appointed) of the deceased hirer. In such cases, death certificate and proof of legal
representation is required.
(c) Where there are joint locker-hirers having a contract of locker hire with a 'either or
survivor' clause and where there is no nomination, access to the locker may be given to the
survivor in case of death of one of the hirers. In such cases, only a death certificate is
required.
(d) Where there are joint locker-hirers, and all the hirers die and where there is no
nomination, access to the locker is given jointly to the legal heirs of all the deceased hirers
(or the executor/administrator if appointed). In such cases, only a death certificate and proof
of legal representation is required.
16.9 PORTFOLIO MANAGEMENT
Portfolio - Definition
Portfolio means a basket of investments or securities in a combined form. Debt securities will
yield interest income and equity investments will yield dividend income apart from capital
appreciation over a period of time. Various groups of securities, when held together, behave
in a different manner and give interest payments and dividends, which are different from the
analysis of individual securities. A combination of securities held together will give a
beneficial result if grouped in a manner so as to secure higher return after taking into
consideration the risk element. Different portfolios will behave differently in the market and
the return on the portfolio will depend on the choice of securities.
Portfolio Management
Portfolio management deals with management of a combination of securities to get the most
efficient portfolio. The process of portfolio management involves a logical set of steps
common to any decision: planning, implementation and monitoring. Yet applying this process
to actual portfolios can be complex and opinions are divided on how best to do so. Large gaps
now exist in the current investment theory and empirical tests often yield contrary results.
Basic Principles of Portfolio Management
(a) It is the portfolio that matters: Individual securities are important only to the extent
that they affect the aggregate portfolio. The risk of a security should preferably not be based
on the uncertainty of a single security's return but on the contribution to the uncertainty of the
total portfolio's return.
(b) Large portfolio returns come only with a larger portfolio risk: The most important
portfolio decision is the amount of risk which is acceptable and is determined by the asset
allocation within the security portfolio. This is not an easy decision, as it calls for information
on the risk and returns available on different classes of assets.
(c) The risk associated with a type of security depends on when the investment is
liquidated: Risk depends on the period of the security and is reduced by selecting those
securities with a payoff close to when the portfolio is to be liquidated.
(d) Diversification works: Diversification across various securities will reduce a
portfolio's risk. If such broad diversification results in an expected portfolio return or a risk
level which is lower than desired, then borrowing can be used to achieve the desired level.
(e) Each portfolio is preferably tailored to the particular needs of its owner: People have
varying tax rates, knowledge, transaction costs, etc., and as such, the portfolio strategy should
take into account the unique needs and characteristics of the owner.
156
(f) Competition for abnormal returns is extensive: A large number of people are continuously
using a large variety of techniques in an attempt to obtain abnormal returns. If the actions of
the speculators are truly effective, security prices will adjust instantaneously to new
information.
Portfolio Management Scheme - RBI Guidelines
The Portfolio Management Service (PMS) in a broader sense means advising for a fee in the
deployment of surplus funds in profitable channels at the risk and responsibility of the owners
of the funds.
(a) PMS services are provided at the customer's risk, without guaranteeing them a pre-
determined return;
(b) The services are provided to parties in respect of their long-term investible funds;
(c) The minimum period, for which funds are placed by the clients, should be one year;
(d) The transactions should be booked at market rates only;
(e) Proper accounting and documentation has to be ensured;
(f) Funds accepted for portfolio management should not be entrusted to another bank for
management;
(g) A definite fee is charged for such services independent of the return to the client;
(h) The funds are expected to be deployed essentially in capital market instruments such as
shares, debentures, bonds, securities etc., but are not to be employed for lending in call
money/bill market and lending to/placement with corporate bodies;
(i) Transactions between the bank's investment account and portfolio account are to be
strictly at market rates;
(j) While putting through transactions on behalf of a portfolio account, a clear indication has
to be given that the transactions pertain to the 'portfolio';
(k) The undeployed funds are the same as outside borrowings of the bank and Cash Reserve
Ratio
(CRR Statutory Reserve Ratio (SLR) has to be maintained on such funds; (1) The banks'
liability to its clients in respect of funds accepted for portfolio management has to be properly
reflected in the published accounts.
16.10 SUMMARY
The conventional modes of remittance of funds are demand draft, bankers' cheque, mail
transfer, telegraphic transfer. Following the technological advancements the new system of
remittances such RTGS, National Electronic Fund Transfer (NEFT) have come in, which
facilitate immediate transfer of funds between banks.
Portfolio means a basket of investments or securities in a combined form. Portfolio
management deals with management of a combination of securities to get the most efficient
portfolio. Portfolio management involves certain basic principles and the process involves
efficient planning, proper implementation and effective monitoring. The Reserve Bank has
come out with certain guidelines for banks to follow while managing a customer's portfolio.
16.11 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS
1. A Demand Draft is issued by the banks to be valid for,
(a) 12 months (b) 6 months
(c) 3 months (d) None of the above
2. A customer is entitled to issuance of a duplicate DD in place of the lost one, provided
(a) he gives due intimation to the issuing branch
(b) payment of DD not already made by the drawee branch
(c) execution of an indemnity signed by both the payee and the purchaser of the DD
157
(d) payment of a fee as applicable for issue of such duplicate DD
(e) all the above
3. One of the following statements is not true with regard to a locker facility in the bank.
(a) In the case of a sole hirer of a safety locker, nomination can be made in favour of only
one individual.
(b) A locker cannot be hired by limited companies, specified associations and societies
etc.
(c) In the case of death of a sole locker-hirer (where there is nomination) access to locker
may be given to the nominee
(d) Where there are joint locker-hirers having a contract of locker hire with a 'either or
survivor' clause and where there is no nomination, access to the locker may be given to the
survivor in case of death of one of the hirers.
4. One of the following statements is not true with respect to RTGS:
(a) Funds are transferable from the branch of one bank to the branch of another bank.
(b) Only the corporate and Government departments can avail of the facility
(c) The RTGS system is maintained and operated by the RBI
(d) Each participant bank here of the RTGS will be required to open a dedicated
settlement account for putting through its RTGS transactions.
5. One of the following statements is not true with respect to NEFT.
(a) Funds are transferable electronically from one customer account of a participant bank
branch to another customer account of any other participant bank branch.
(b) The individual branches participating in NEFT can be located only in the urban/metro
centres.
(c) The remitting branch prepares a structured financial messaging solution (SFMS)
message and sends it to its service centre for NEFT.
(d) The RBI at the clearing centre sorts the transactions bank-wise and prepares the
accounting entries of net debit or credit for passing on to the banks participating in the
system.
6. State True/False
(a) Portfolio management relies on the combination of securities to get most efficient
portfolio
(b) Risk and return have the same meaning in selection of a portfolio
(c) The role of a portfolio manager lies in study of investor, investment strategy etc.
(d) A portfolio manager is any person who, pursuant to a contract or arrangement with a
client, advises, directs or undertakes on behalf of the client the management or administration
of a portfolio of securities or the funds of the client.
(e) A purchaser of a Demand Draft can countermand its payment by the drawee bank.
16.12 ANSWERS TO CHECK YOUR PROGRESS'
1. (b); 2. (e); 3. (b); 4. (b); 5. (b); 6. (a) T, (b) F, (c) T, (d) T, (e) F.
16.13 KEYWORDS
Demand Draft, Bankers Cheque, Mail Transfer, Traveller's Cheque, Real Time Gross
Settlement (RTGS), National Electronic Funds Transfer (NEFT), Lockers, Portfolio, Portfolio
Management, Portfolio Investment.
STRUCTURE
17.0 Objectives
17.1 Introduction
17.2 Principles of Lending
17.2.1 Cardinal Principles of Lending
17.3 Non-fund based Limits
17.3.1 Bank Guarantees
17.3.2 Letters of Credit (L/C)
17.4 Working Capital and Term Loans
17.5 Adequacy of Working Capital
17.6 Difference between Term Loans and Working Capital
17.7 Credit Appraisal Techniques
17.8 Sources of Working Capital Funds
17.9 Estimation of Working Capital Needs
17.10 Operating Cycle Method
17.11 Projected Net Working Capital
17.12 Projected Turnover Method
17.13 Cash Budget System
17.14 Credit Management
17.15 Credit Monitoring
17.16 Check Your Progress
17.17 Answers to 'Check Your Progress'
17.18 Keywords
UNIT
17
PRINCIPLES OF LENDING, WORKING CAPITAL ASSESSMENT AND CREDIT
MONITORING
160
17.0 OBJECTIVES
After reading this unit, the student should be able to know:
• The principles or basics of lending by banks. Analysing the lending principles with
the changing
times and developments in the society. Implications of the new prudential accounting norms
based
on the principles of lending, methods of assessing a borrower and his credit requirements.
• The concept of working capital/net working capital/term loan finance/ adequacy of
working capital.
17.1 INTRODUCTION
The main source of funds for a banker is deposits from the public, which are repayable
whenever demanded by the depositors. The banker while lending should, therefore, follow
sound principles of lending and should assess the permissible limits of finance on the basis of
accepted norms.
17.2 PRINCIPLES OF LENDING
17.2.1 Cardinal Principles of Lending
The business of lending is not without certain inherent risks, especially when the lending
banks depend largely on the borrowed funds. The cardinal principles of lending are,
therefore, as follows:
(a) Safety * (b) Liquidity (c) Profitability
(d) Purpose (e) Diversification of Risks (f) Security
(a) Safety
Safety first is the most important principle of good lending. When a banker lends certain
monies, he has to ensure that the advance is safe and that the money lent will comeback.
While banks are, no doubt, traders in money; the money lent does not belong to them but to
the public, i.e. the depositors. The banker is a custodian of public funds and lends money
which has been entrusted to his care by the depositor and which is to be repaid in accordance
with the tenure of the deposit. The repayment of loans depends upon the borrower's (i)
capacity to pay, (ii) willingness to pay, (iii) income generation. The banker must, therefore,
take utmost care in ensuring that the enterprise or business, for which a loan is sought, is a
sound one and the borrower is capable of carrying it out successfully.
(b) Liquidity
It is to be seen that money lent is not going to be locked up for a long time. The money
should return to the bank as per the repayment schedule. About seventy per cent of the
deposits collected are repayable within a year, so the funds advanced should be for working
capital and not for term loans of above three years. The art of banking consists of knowing
the difference between a mortgage and a bill of exchange.
(c) Profitability
A fair return on investment is essential so also in the case of lending by banks. Banks are
commercial organisations and profit earning is the motto of banks to pay adequate dividend
to the stakeholders. The interest margin of three to four per cent between lending and
borrowing is essential to meet their administrative expenses. While looking at profitability, it
is prudent for a banker to look at the overall profitability from all businesses undertaken for a
customer instead of applying the test of profitability against each component of business or
service offered separately. Possibly a banker may not be earning a desirable return on a
service undertaken for a customer, while he may be more than compensated in respect of
another service or business undertaken for the same customer. It is, therefore, advisable to
have a Customer Profitability Analysis (CPA) done when the banker is engaged in more than
one
161
service or business for a customer, this is all the more necessary not only to assess the
profitability of the operation/business vis-a-vis a customer but also to enable a banker to
decide on as to what length he can go in parting with a portion of profit and offer a
competitive rate for the customers. Such an analysis will be very helpful to the banker in
pricing his product whether it is in lending or offering a service to a customer.
In the current context of the availability of freedom to a banker in the matter of pricing credit
and services, a very conscious and a careful exercise is called for on his part in order to strike
a proper balance between the twin aims of making a desirable level of profit and at the same
time offering a competitive price for the product/service offered. This is the kind of approach
that is required of a banker in order to entice new customers to his fold while retaining the
existing customers. Hence, there is a direct relationship between profit and pricing of credit
or service offered by a banker.
(d) Purpose
Loans for undesirable and speculative purposes cannot be granted. Although the earnings on
such business activities may be higher, even then a bank cannot resort to these loans.
(e) Diversification of Risks
It means that the banker should not grant advances to only a few business houses,
undertakings, cities, industries or regions. It should be ensured that the advances are
diversified in a good number of customers.
(f) Security
The security offered against the loans may consist of a large variety of items. It may be plot
or land, building, flat, shop, ornaments, insurance policies, shares, debentures, bonds etc.
There may be cases where there is no security except the personal security. The banker must
realise that it is only a cushion to fall back upon in case of need. The security and its
adequacy alone should not form the sole consideration for judging the suitability of a loan. Of
course, the security, if accepted, must be adequate and readily marketable, easy to handle and
free from encumbrances.
17.3 NON-FUND BASED LIMITS
While ascertaining the credit needs of the borrower, the bankers should assess both the fund
based and non-fund based limits required by him together and sanction them as a package.
The non-fund based limits are normally of two types: (i) bank guarantees, (ii) letters of credit.
17.3.1 Bank Guarantees
By issuing a bank guarantee, the guarantor bank accepts the responsibility for an obligation,
if the entity with the primary responsibility for the obligation does not meet it. The guarantor
is one who guarantees an obligation and has a legal duty to fulfil it. On issuing a guarantee,
the guarantor pays when the primary debtor fails to meet his obligation.
While assessing the bank guarantee limit required by a borrower, details such as the nature of
guarantee, its purpose, the particulars of the contract period and the amount for which the
guarantee is sought are collected first, then these have to be assessed from the aspect of
creditworthiness of the customer and his relationship with the bank, before a decision is taken
regarding the sanction of limits requested by the customer. Appropriate conditions with
regard to cash margin and security, registration of charge with ROC, in case the customer is a
corporate, will have to be laid down in the sanction to protect the interests of the bank, in the
event of a default of the customer to fulfil his part of the obligation of the contract relating to
which the bank guarantee has been issued and the liability thereon likely to be crystallised on
the banker. While issuing the bank guarantee, the banker has to keep in mind the
162
instructions of RBI with regard to certain purposes that prohibit the issue of bank guarantees
and also the extended liability period that has been occasioned consequent to amendment of
Section 128 of Indian Contract Act with respect of guarantees issued in favour of the
government departments.
17.3.2 Letters of Credit (L/C)
A Letter of Credit (L/C) is a binding document that a buyer of goods can request from the
bank in order to guarantee that the payment for goods will be transferred to the seller. In order
for the payment to occur, the seller has to present the bank with necessary documents as per
L/C terms.
While sanctioning the letter of credit limits for the purchase of raw materials, the banker has
to collect the following particulars:
(a) Value of raw materials consumed in the ensuing year as projected
(b) Value of raw materials that are purchased on credit out of the above
(c) Time taken for advising the letter of credit to the beneficiary
(d) Time for shipment and the consignment to reach the customer's destination.
(e) Credit period (usance period) agreed between the beneficiary and the customer
(f) Credit period projected and reckoned for calculation of the maximum permissible
bank finance (MPBF) while sanctioning the funded limits to the borrower customer
Once the above information is available, the banker can assess the letter of credit limit as
explained in the following illustration:
Estimation
1. Value of raw material consumption projected: Rs. 3,600 lakh
2. Value of raw material (to be) bought on credit: Rs. 2,400 lakh
3. Time for advising L/C: 10 days
4. Shipment time: 20 days
5. Credit period agreed upon between the seller and the customer OR the credit period
projected as available in CMA format considered for calculation of MPBF while sanctioning
funded limits, whichever is less: 30 days
Time required for one cycle of operation of L/C will be 10 + 20 + 30 = 60 days.
Assuming 360 days in a year, there could be 6 rotations/cycles in a year. If the raw material
consumed, to be bought on credit is Rs. 2,400 lakh in a year, the limit of L/C per
rotation/cycle will work out to.
Rs. 2,400 lakh /6 = Rs. 400 lakh
The letter of credit limit required, given the above situation, would be Rs. 400 lakh. A banker
should ensure that the stocks procured through the L/C are taken under hypothecation and are
not included in the stocks declared as security for the fund based limits granted to the
customer. If the L/C limit is sanctioned for purchase of capital goods, the same is taken under
a hypothecation charge by the banker.
17.4 WORKING CAPITAL AND TERM LOANS
Concept of Working Capital
The term working capital denotes the requirement of the money by a manufacturing
enterprise for its day-to-day financing of:
(i) purchase a raw materials, stores and spares (ii) payment of wages to employees
163
(iii) payment of other expenses towards energy, fuel and water consumption, statutory dues,
rates and taxes carriage expenses etc.
(iv) other expenses required to be incurred in connection with the production, selling and
administration etc.
The banks normally define the working capital as the sum total of inventory, receivables and
other current assets held by a business entity. It is computed by the banks through the concept
of the operating cycle, i.e. the time taken by a business entity to get the money released from
the raw materials, semi¬finished goods, finished goods, receivables etc., it carries at a point
of time. The time taken to convert the inventory of raw materials, semi-finished goods,
finished goods and the due receivables into cash generally differs from industry to industry.
There are two concepts of working capital:
(a)Gross working capital means the firm's investment in total current or floating (circulating)
assets.
(b)Net working capital means
(i) the excess of current assets over the current liabilities or,
(ii) that portion of a firm's current assets financed by the long-term funds.
The long-term resources comprise owned funds of the company, i.e. paid-up capital/reserves
including the current year's profits and term loans from banks and financial
institutions/debentures etc.
17.5 ADEQUACY OF WORKING CAPITAL
A firm should have adequate working capital, i.e. as much as needed by the firm. It should
neither be excessive nor inadequate. Both situations are dangerous. Excessive working capital
means the firm has idle funds, which earn no profits for the firm. Inadequate working capital
means the firm does not have sufficient funds for running its operations, which ultimately
results in production interruptions leading to reduced profitability which may even lead to
losses.
It is interesting to understand the relationship between working capital, risk and return. In a
manufacturing concern, it is generally accepted that the higher levels of working capital
decrease the risk and also decreases the profitability, While lower levels of working capital
increase the risk but have the potentiality of increasing the profitability also. This principle is
based on the following assumption:
(i) Higher the risk, higher is the profitability, while lower is the risk, lower the profitability,
(ii) Current assets are less profitable than fixed assets, (iii) Short-term funds are less
expensive than long-term funds.
On account of the above principle, an increase in the ratio of current assets to total assets will
result in a decline in the profitability of the firm. This is because investment in current assets
is less profitable than those in fixed assets. However, an increase in this ratio would decrease
the risk of the firm becoming technically insolvent. On the other hand, a decrease in the ratio
of current assets to total assets would increase the profitability of the firm because investment
in fixed assets is more profitable than the investment in current assets. However, this will
increase the risk of the firm becoming technically insolvent on account of its possible
inability of meeting its commitments in time due to a shortage of funds.
Term loans are loans which are payable after one year and up to ten years. It is availed of for
acquisition of fixed assets, i.e. land, factory, office building, warehouses, machinery etc.,
needed for commencing, expanding or modernising its activities. These loans are repaid by
the borrowing concerns in instalments out of the profits earned. The schedule of repayment
and duration of the loan is fixed on the basis of the assessed ability of the undertaking to
generate surpluses for making repayments. Loans for periods up
164
to three years are called short-term loans, loans from three years to seven years, medium-term
loans and periods exceeding seven years up to ten years are known as long-term loans.
17.6 DIFFERENCE BETWEEN TERM LOANS AND WORKING CAPITAL
The major difference between term loans and working capital finance lies in the purpose of
the finance, the type of assets created out of it and the form in which the advance is made by
the bank. The other differences are:
(i) Term loans are utilised for establishing, expanding or modernising a manufacturing unit by
acquisition of fixed assets, while the working capital finance is utilised for operating purposes
resulting in the creation of current assets for production and the sale of finished goods.
(ii) Term loans are usually of medium- or long-term duration and are repayable in quarterly or
half yearly instalments over an agreed period of time.
(iii) The working capital finance is generally availed of in cash credit hypothecation accounts
with frequent drawings and repayments and is payable on demand.
17.7 CREDIT APPRAISAL TECHNIQUES
In the credit appraisal process, the decision maker makes an attempt to find the answer to two
important questions. First, whether the entrepreneur requires funds, also what are his
credentials? If the answer to the first question is positive, the second question is all about the
extent of his requirements and the ways in which the requirements can be met.
Assessment of credit requirements for small enterprises is often difficult because of a lack of
data relating to operations of the units in this category. RBI has, therefore, suggested that
lending banks may not insist on the submission of audited financial statements up to credit
requirements of Rs. 25 lakh from the prospective borrowers. Beyond this level, lending
bankers usually compute the credit requirements after undertaking a structured analysis of the
financial statements.
Till about 1990, bank credit was considered a scarce commodity and, therefore, there was a
strong focus on the need to optimally use this resource towards the creation of primary assets,
which are known as primary security charged in favour of the lending bank. With gradual
liberalisation, commercial banks have begun providing credit to other sectors and even for
those commodities which are not in the manufacturing sectors. In the monetary policy of
1997-98, RBI declared the MPBF method as optional and suggested that commercial banks
may evolve their own rational methods for financing. RBI suggested 'CASH BUDGET'
method as an alternative option. Due to non-performing asset norms, credit appraisal
techniques are increasingly focused on the assessment of repayment capacity of the
borrowers, which in turn depends on their cash generating ability.
17.8 SOURCES OF WORKING CAPITAL FUNDS
The major sources of working capital funds for investment in current assets are; trade
credits/unsecured loans/deposits/bank borrowings/advance payments/stage-by-stage
payments, etc.
17.9 ESTIMATION OF WORKING CAPITAL NEEDS
The conditions of commercial banks for lending on a short-term basis are rigorous. A
customer has to satisfy his bank about his character, capacity, capital and collateral, in brief
he has to establish his creditworthiness. If the overall appraisal is satisfactory, the bank will
finance only the residual gap in the customers' resources, after taking into consideration the
expected availability from all other sources of funds. Generally, there are four methods of
estimating the working capital requirements of a borrower:
165
(a) The operating cycle method (b) The projected net working capital method
(c) The projected turnover method (d) The cash budget
These methods require the preparation of:
(a) Projected financial statements (b) Projected fund flow statements
(c) Projected cash flow statements/cash budgets
It must be emphasised that the assessment of the working capital requirements of a firm must
be preceded by a detailed appraisal of the past and future viability of the firm's planning,
operations and financial position. It is implicit that the firm will have to submit an acceptable
business plan, in the form of projected financial statements, to the bank. Thereafter, the
assessment of working capital needs is made based on the past trends, the end use of funds
and the estimated requirement of additional funds as revealed by the firm's business plan or
the cash budget, in cases of those firms which have a marked seasonality of operations.
17.10 OPERATING CYCLE METHOD
The second step is the estimation of the holding periods of major current assets. If part of raw
materials is available on credit, then bank finance will be required only for that portion of the
raw materials which represents fully paid purchases. Similarly, if advance payments are
received against orders, only that part of the finished goods net of the advance payment will
require bank credit.
Borrowers in the small and medium enterprises segment face a problem in collecting dues
from their customers, particularly from the corporate sectors. In order to provide a relief to
borrowers who face such a situation, the banks as part of their loan policy, decided as
follows:
(i) While assessing working capital requirement, creditors will not be set-off against stock (ii)
The borrowers will submit details age-wise list of sundry creditors and sundry debtors as well
as the stock statement, (iii) Only those debtors will be considered who are outstanding for
less than the period specified (up to 180 days maximum) from a case to case basis, (iv) The
total outstanding creditors will be netted from the total outstanding eligible debtors. If
creditors are in excess, the excess portion will be deducted from the value of stocks. If
debtors are in excess, the bank could consider financing the surplus debtors as per the banks
policy, (v) The borrower will have to hypothecate his entire book debts to the bank, (vi) The
bank will not finance the borrower's book debts if creditors exceed debtors.
17.11 PROJECTED NET WORKING CAPITAL
The margin requirements have to be met by the borrower from the accruals during the course
of the year and/or other long-term funds, in the form of net working capital. The projected net
working capital, if higher than the current level maintained by the borrower, would be built
up progressively with the growth in production, sales and profits. Therefore, during the initial
stages in the current year, the NWC would generally be lower than the assessed, and in such
circumstances, the borrower may not be able to maintain the stipulated current ratio, ranging
from 1.25 to 1.33 or higher. On the merits of each case, banks, in such circumstances, may
accept either of the two alternatives.
(i) Release the assessed limits/credit on the borrower's undertaking to augment the NWC to
the required level within a time frame of 2 quarters, provided the borrower maintains a
current ratio between 1.17 and 1.25. In the meantime, the borrower brings in short-term funds
from other sources to meet the shortfall in NWC.
166
(ii) Release a temporary limit equivalent to the shortfall in NWC for a short term, say one
quarter, in addition to the duly assessed limits. In this case, the short-term loan from the bank
is in lieu of the market borrowings that the borrower had to raise as the other alternative:
Here again, the borrower has to maintain a lower current ratio between 1.17 and 1.25, but
restore the ratio within a stipulated time frame.
Banks may also, on a case to case basis, allow the computation of NWC of a borrower for
assessment of working capital needs, by excluding the term loan instalments payable, from
current liabilities.
17.12 PROJECTED TURNOVER METHOD
Banks, as a matter of policy and based on RBI guidelines, assess the working capital
requirements including those of village industries, tiny industries, (SSI units and traders) with
a fund based working capital limit of up to Rs. 4 crore by the turnover method.
RBI has given following instructions:
(i) Twenty per cent of their projected annual gross sales turnover may be considered as
minimum working capital finance by banks, (ii) In order to ensure that a minimum margin
supports the working capital needs of a borrower, a five per cent contribution is given by the
promoters, (iii) Guideline for the turnover method is framed, assuming an average operating
cycle of three months.
If the cycle is more than three months, the borrower should bring in a proportionately higher
stake in relation to his requirement of the bank finance, (iv) Drawing power is calculated
through stock statements. Unpaid stocks are not to be financed, as it would result in double
financing.
The critical issue in the turnover method is the determination of the projected annual gross
sales or turnover.
17.13 CASH BUDGET SYSTEM
The current loan policies of most banks state that, for an assessment of the working capital
needs of a borrower who enjoys or requires fund based limits in excess of Rs.10 crore, the
cash budget system should be used.
A cash budget is a statement of cash receipts and cash payments. It is distinct from the cash
flow statement, in as much as the latter deals both cash and non-cash funds, while the cash
budget deals with cash transactions only. Cash budget is a substitute for the operating cycle
method for the assessment of working capital. A cash budget is usually prepared for short
periods, i.e. a week/fortnight/month or a quarter. Cash budget has to have the following steps
in sequence when prepared for a quarter.
(a) Actual receipts and payments during the first, the second and the third month.
(b) The position of the cash surplus/deficit is computed at monthly intervals. A surplus is
generated if the receipts exceed the payment and a cash deficit occurs if payments are more
than the receipts during the month.
(c) The opening cash balance for the first month is adjusted against the cash
surplus/deficit that is generated during the month. The adjusted figure is the closing balance
at the end of the first month, which becomes the opening balance for the next month, viz., the
second month.
(d) A cash surplus generated during a month results in a higher closing cash balance vis-
a-vis the opening balance of the month. Conversely, a cash deficit during the month would
cause a lower level of the closing cash balance as compared to the opening balance.
167
(e) If the enterprise has a net position on borrowed funds (i.e. the company maintains a cash
credit/ overdraft account), a cash surplus generated during a month brings down the level of
the borrowed funds at the end of the month.
A cash budget is, therefore, a projection into the future, as against a cash flow statement that
is usually historical in nature. Cash budgets are essential for assessment of working capital
needs in situations like (I) opening of LC, (ii) ad hoc working capital, (iii) bill financing, (iv)
financing construction activities, (v) financing seasonal industries, (vi) tea growing, (vii)
sugar manufacturing, (viii) software development activities, (ix) coffee/rubber/cardamom/rice
milling, etc.
Advantages
Short-term lending on the basis of cash budget offers a viable alternative to the existing
security oriented pattern of credit allocation by banks. The main advantages of cash budget
system are:
(a) The customer plans his cash requirements in advance and in case his bank is unable to
sanction additional funds, the customer can seek alternative sources well in advance.
(b) The banker is in close touch with his customers. He would, therefore, be able to spot
any danger signals quickly and initiate corrective action in time.
(c) The banker can plan his resources to meet expected credit demands. Credit planning
would thus become a meaningful exercise.
17.14 CREDIT MANAGEMENT
Credit management is the management of the credit portfolio of banks and financial
institutions. The expression 'credit' refers to short-term loans and advances as well to
medium-/long-term loans and off balance sheet transactions. Management includes, within its
preview, pre-sanction appraisal, sanction, documentation, disbursement and post-lending
supervision and control. In the highly competitive ^nd deregulated environment, banks and
financial institutions have to evolve better systems and procedures to manage the credit needs
of their highly demanding customers, particularly in the corporate and retail sectors. The
developments of the past decade have totally changed the credit management perspectives in
banks. The term 'Credit management' encompasses the following:
(a) Capital adequacy norms
(b) Risk management, including asset liability management (ALM)
(c) Exposure norms
(d) Risk pricing policy and credit risk rating
(e) Asset classification, income recognition and provisioning norms
(f) Appraisal, credit decision-making and loan review mechanism
From 1 April 2002, the exposure ceiling is 15 per cent of the capital funds in the case of a
single borrower and 40 per cent in the case of group borrowings. Exposure to borrowers,
belonging to a group, may exceed the exposure norm of 40 per cent of the bank's capital
funds by an additional 10 per cent total up to 50 per cent, provided the additional exposure is
on account of an extension of credit to infrastructure projects.
Several risks affect credit decisions. The main risks are credit risk, market risk (mainly
liquidity risk and interest rate risk) and operational risk. Credit risk is defined as the
possibility of losses associated with a diminution in the credit quality of borrowers or counter
parties. Such risks are:
(a) Principal/interest amount may not be paid.
(b) Funds may not be forthcoming from clients upon invocation of L/C, guarantees.
(c) Payments or series of payments due from the counter parties may not be coming in
case of treasury operations.
168
(d) Funds/securities settlement may not be effected in securities trading.
(e) Availability and free transfer of foreign currency funds may either cease or
restrictions may be imposed by the sovereign.
RBI has defined market risk as the possibility of loss to a bank, caused by changes in market
variables, which are:
(b) Interest rate risk
(d) Commodity price risk
(a) Liquidity risk
(c) Foreign exchange rate risk
(e) Equity price risk.
Assets and Liability Management Committee (ALMC) functions as the top operational unit
for a bank. Banks also face another risk, known as operational risk. The operational risk
arises from human or technical error or acts of omission and commission such as
ineffectiveness or breakdown in the internal control and internal audit systems. The risk can
lead to losses through fraud, errors or a failure in performance in a timely manner.
Operational risk includes legal risks but excludes strategic and reputation risk.
Banks' advances portfolio is classified under the following four categories:
(a) Standard assets (b)Sub-standard assets
(c) Doubtful assets (d) Loss assets
Provisions at different rates are to be made on the above category of assets.
The impact of the credit appraisal exercise, undertaken by banks at the time of a fresh credit
sanction or credit extension, should be felt in the credit risk rating as per the risk pricing
policy of the bank. The position should be periodically reviewed with the concerned
borrowers and remedial measures recorded and implemented without loss of time.
Notices for renewal or reviews of the loan accounts are sent to the borrowers well in advance.
Though renewals for the working capital advance, as per present practice, is done annually,
for those loan accounts showing signs of incipient sickness and deteriorating credit risk,
quarterly short reviews should be conducted. Close monitoring of loan accounts with a high
or a deteriorating credit risk by branches and controlling offices and/or head office will
ensure that the overall risk exposure of the bank is controlled.
17.15 CREDIT MONITORING
The credit monitoring in a bank is to ensure that the funds are utilised for the sanctioned
purposes and at the same time complying with all sanction terms and conditions The purpose
of the exercise is also to avoid the time lag and cost overruns, to detect early warning signals
and symptoms of incipient sickness in the units financed by banks and to initiate timely
action for recovery or rehabilitation.
Under Credit Monitoring Arrangement, banks ensure the following:
(a) Borrower should maintain reasonable estimates of current assets, current liabilities
and working capital.
(b) Should maintain classification of current assets and current liabilities as per bank's
guidelines.
(c) Should maintain a minimum current ratio of 1.33 except for export industry and for
new units.
(d) Should submit annual audited accounts in time for annual review by banks.
(e) Ad hoc limits are sanctioned for periods not exceeding three months.
(f) As far as possible, post-sale limits are sanctioned in the form of Bill Finance.
169
17.16 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS
1. Cardinal principles of lending are
(a) Safety and liquidity (b) profitability and diversification of risks
(c) purpose and security (d) Only (i) and (iii)
(e) All of (i) to (iii)
2. Liquidity with a banker means
(a)Cash on Hand
(b)Cash and Bank balances
(c) Short-term current assets to convert into cash
(d)All of above
(e)None
3. Customer profitability analysis means
(a)Exercise done by bank before lending to a customer
(b) Exercise before opening a new branch
(c) Assess the profitability of customer's business
(d)Only (i) and (iii)
(e)None
4. Banker can reduce risk in lending to a borrower
(a) By obtaining adequate security
(b)By ensuring that there will be no problem of liquidity with borrower
(c) By ensuring that there will be no default on account of lack of liquidity and lack of
willingness
to pay on the part of the borrower.
5. In banker's parlance, credit risk in lending refers to
(a) Default of repayment by a borrower
(b) Default of bankers in maintaining SLR
(c) Default of a banker to release credit to a borrower
(d) None of above
6. Net working capital means
(a) Current assets - Current Liabilities (b) Owned funds – Goodwill
(c) Use of assets + Sources of funds (d) None of above.
7. Major Current assets are
(a) Marketable investments and Cash/receivables/inventories
(b) Inventories + Cash + Receivables
(c) Shares in sister concern + Unquoted shares + Cash
(d) All of above.
8. What are the sources of working capital?
(a) Trade credits + Unsecured loans + Deposits
(b) Bank borrowings + Advance payments
(c) Net working capital
(d) All of above
(e) None
9. Working capital means
(a)Requirements for the day-to-day transactions
(b) Excess of current assets over current liabilities
(c)Fixed assets - Current assets
(d) None of above.
170
10. Term loans mean Loans
(a) Payable after one year to ten years
(b) Repayments are done in instalments
(c) Term loans are utilised for acquisition of fixed assets
(d) All of above
(e) Only (i) and (ii)
11. Working capital needs are estimated by
(a) Operating cycle method (b) Projected turnover method
(c) Cash budget method (d) Any of above
(e) None of above.
12. Difference between cash budget and cash flow
(a) Cash flow deals with cash and non-cash funds.
(b) Cash budget deals with cash transactions only.
(c) Cash flow statements are generally for quarterly or half-yearly while cash budgets are
for shorter periods.
(d) Cash budget is a projection into the future while a cash flow statement is historical.
(e) All of above.
13. Advantages of cash budget could be
(a) Borrower should plan in advance the cash requirements.
(b) Banker is able to spot a danger signal quickly and corrective measures are taken.
(c) Banker can plan his resources to meet credit demands.
(d) All of above.
(e) Any of the above.
14. Is there any exposure ceiling for banks in providing advances/loans to borrowers?
(a) 15 per cent of capital funds for single borrower and 40 per cent in a borrower's group.
(b) 10 per cent of capital funds for single borrower and 20 per cent in a borrower's group.
(c) 25 per cent of capital funds for single borrower and 50 per cent in a borrower's group
for infrastructural projects.
(d) no such ceiling.
15. Credit decisions are affected by risks like:
(a) Credit risk/market risk/operational risk (b) Liquidity/ interest rate/ foreign exchange rate
(c) Commodity price/equity price risks (d) None of the above
17.17 ANSWERS TO CHECK YOUR PROGRESS'
1. (e), 2. (d), 3. (c), 4. (c), 5. (a), 6. (a), 7. (a), 8. (d), 9. (a), 10. (d), 11. (d), 12. (e), 13. (d), 14.
(a), 15. (a).
17.18 KEYWORDS
Customer Profitability Analysis (CPA) Fund Based Limit, Non-funded or Non-Fund Based
Limit, Bank Guarantee, Letter of Credit (L/C), Maximum Permissible Bank Finance (MPBF),
Working Capital Limit, Net Working Capital (NWC), Term Loan, Credit Appraisal, Cash
Budget, Fund Flow Statement, Cash Flow Statement, Operating Cycle, Credit Monitoring,
Capital Adequacy, Credit Risk, Market Risk, Liquidity Risk, Operational Risk, Risk
Management, Asset Classification, Income Recognition, Provisioning Norms, Asset Liability
Management (ALM), Loan Review Mechanism (LRM), Doubtful Asset, Loss Asset,
Quarterly Production Record (QPR).
PRIORITY SECTOR ADVANCES
STRUCTURE
18.0 Objectives
18.1 Introduction
18.2 Categories of Priority Sector: With Effect From 30 April 2007
18.3 Targets/Sub-Targets
18.4 Recent Developments in Priority Sector Lending
18.5 Let Us Sum Up
18.6 Check Your Progress
18.7 Answers to 'Check Your Progress'
18.8 Keywords
18.0 OBJECTIVES
A study of this unit will facilitate you to learn the concept of Priority Sector Lending by the
banking sector, the RBI guidelines on priority sector lending and the latest developments in
this field.
18.1 INTRODUCTION
At a meeting of the National Credit Council held in July 1968, the Government of India
emphasised that commercial banks should increase their involvement in the financing of
priority sectors, viz., agriculture and small scale industries. The description of the priority
sectors was later formalised in 1972 on the basis of the report submitted by the informal study
group on statistics relating to advances to the priority sectors constituted by the Reserve Bank
in May 1971. Based on this report, the Reserve Bank prescribed a modified return for
reporting on the priority sector advances and certain guidelines issued in this connection
indicating the scope of the items to be included under the various categories of priority
sectors. Although initially there was no specific target fixed in respect of priority sector
lending, the Reserve Bank advised the banks in November 1974 to raise the share of these
sectors in their aggregate advances to the level of 33 and one-third per cent by March 1979.
At a meeting of the Union Finance Minister with the CEOs of public sector banks held in
March 1980, it was agreed that banks should aim at raising the proportion of their advances
to priority sectors to 40 per cent by March 1985. Based on the recommendations of the
working group on the modalities of implementation of priority sector lending and the twenty
point economic programme by banks, all commercial banks were advised to achieve the
target of priority sector lending at 40 per cent of the aggregate bank advances by 1985. Sub-
targets were also specified for lending to agriculture and the weaker sections within the
priority sector. Since then, there have been several changes in the scope of priority sector
lending and the targets and sub-targets applicable to various bank groups.
18.2 CATEGORIES OF PRIORITY SECTOR: WITH EFFECT FROM 30 APRIL, 2007
(i) Agriculture (Direct and Indirect finance): Direct finance to agriculture would include;
short-, medium- and long-term loans given for agriculture and allied activities (dairy, fishery,
piggery, poultry, beekeeping, etc.) directly to individual farmers, self-help groups (SHGs) or
joint liability groups (JLGs) of individual farmers without limit and to others (such as
corporates, partnership firms and institutions) up to certain limits, for taking up agriculture
and allied activities. Indirect finance to agriculture shall include loans given for agriculture
and allied activities to those engaged in distribution of inputs like fertilisers, pesticides, seeds,
cattle and poultry feeds, etc., and to State Electricity Boards and such other organisations.
(ii) Small Enterprises (Direct and Indirect Finance): Direct finance to small enterprises
includes all loans given to micro and small (manufacturing) enterprises engaged in the
manufacture/production, processing or preservation of goods, and micro and small (service)
enterprises engaged in providing or rendering of services, and whose investment in plant and
machinery and equipment (original cost excluding land and building and such items)
respectively does not exceed the amounts specified in the Table 18.1.
The micro and small (service) enterprises shall include small road and water transport
operators, small business professional and self-employed persons, and all other service
enterprises. Indirect finance to small enterprises shall include finance to any person providing
inputs to or for marketing the output of artisans, village and cottage industries, handlooms
and to co-operatives of producers in this sector.
(iii) Retail Trade: Includes retail traders/private retail traders dealing in essential commodities
(fair price shops), and consumer co-operative stores.
173
TABLE 18.1: Description of Micro, Small and Medium Sectors
Enterprise
Micro
Small
Medium Manufacturing Sector
Where the investment in plant and machinery does not exceed Rs. 25 lakh. (Currently called
as Tiny Sector)
Where the investment in plant and machinery is more than Rs. 25 lakh but does not exceed
Rs. 5 crore.
Where the investment in plant and machinery is more than Rs. 5 crore but does not exceed
Rs. 10 crore. Services sector
Where the investment in equipment does not exceed Rs. 10 lakh. (Currently called as
SSSBEs)
Small
Where the investment in equipment is more than Rs. 10 lakh but does not exceed Rs. 2 crore.
Medium
Where the investment in equipment is more than Rs. 2 crore but does not exceed Rs. 5 crore.
Note: Hitherto SSIs were units with an investment limit up to Rs. 1 crore and for select items
up to Rs. 5 crore. Now the investment ceiling has been increased to Rs. 5 crore for all SSIs.
Further hitherto, Services Sector under SMEs were not defined but now defined.
(iv) Micro Credit: Provision of credit and other financial services and products of very small
amounts not exceeding Rs.50,000 per borrower, either directly or indirectly through a
SHG/JLG mechanism or to NBFC/MFI for on-lending up to Rs. 50,000 per borrower, will
constitute micro credit.
(v) Education Loans: Education loans include loans and advances granted to only individuals
for educational purposes up to Rs. 10 lakh for studies in India and Rs. 20 lakh for studies
abroad, and do not include those granted to institutions.
(vi) Housing Loans: Loans up to Rs. 20 lakh to individuals for purchase/ construction of a
dwelling unit per family, (excluding loans granted by banks to their own employees) and
loans given for repairs to the damaged dwelling units of families up to Rs. 1 lakh in rural and
semi-urban areas and up to Rs. 2 lakh in urban and metropolitan areas.
18.3 TARGETS/SUB-TARGETS
The scheduled commercial banks are expected to enlarge credit to the priority sector and
ensure that priority sector advances constitute 40 per cent of the net bank credit and that a
substantial portion is directed to the weaker sections. Within the overall main lending target
of 40 per cent of net bank credit, banks should ensure that eighteen per cent of net bank credit
goes to agricultural sector, 10 per cent of net bank credit is given to the 'weaker sections' and
one per cent of previous year's total advances is given under the Differential Rate of Interest
(DRI) scheme. Non-achievement of priority sector targets and sub-targets will be taken into
account by RBI while granting regulatory clearances/approvals for various purposes.
The targets and sub-targets set under priority sector lending for domestic and foreign banks
operating in India are furnished below:
Total Priority Sector Advances
For Domestic Commercial Banks: Forty per cent of adjusted net bank credit (ANBC) or
credit equivalent amount of off balance sheet exposure, whichever is higher.
For Foreign Banks: Thirty-two per cent of ANBC or credit equivalent amount of off balance
sheet exposure, whichever is higher.
Total Agricultural Advances: Eighteen per cent of ANBC or credit equivalent amount of off
balance sheet exposure, whichever is higher. Of this, indirect lending in excess of 4.5 per cent
of ANBC or credit equivalent amount of off balance sheet exposure, whichever is higher, will
not be reckoned for
174
computing performance under the 18 per cent target. However, all agricultural advances
under the categories 'direct' and 'indirect' will be reckoned in computing of performance
under the overall priority sector target of 40 per cent of ANBC or credit equivalent amount of
off balance sheet exposure, whichever is higher. (No target for foreign banks)
Small Enterprise Advances: Advances to small enterprises sector are taken in consideration
for computing performance under the overall priority sector target of 40 per cent of ANBC or
credit equivalent amount of off balance sheet exposure, whichever is higher. (For foreign
banks, it is 10 per cent of ANBC or credit equivalent amount of off balance sheet exposure,
whichever is higher.)
Micro Enterprises within Small Enterprises Sector
(i) Forty per cent of total advances to small enterprises sector should go to micro
(manufacturing) enterprises having investment in plant and machinery up to Rs. 5 lakh and
micro (service) enterprises having investment in equipment up to Rs. 2 lakh;
(ii) Twenty per cent of total advances to small enterprises sector should go to micro
(manufacturing) enterprises with investment in plant and machinery above Rs. 5 lakh and up
to Rs. 25 lakh, and micro (service) enterprises with investment in equipment above Rs. 2 lakh
and up to Rs. 10 lakh.
Thus, 60 per cent of the small enterprises advances should go to the micro enterprises. The
target for foreign banks is the same as that for domestic banks.
Advances to Weaker Sections: Ten per cent of ANBC or credit equivalent amount of off
balance sheet exposure, whichever is higher. No target for foreign banks.
Differential Rate of Interest Scheme: One per cent of total advances outstanding, as on the
end of the previous year. It should be ensured that not less than forty per cent of the total
advances granted under DRI scheme go to scheduled caste/scheduled tribes. At least two-
third of DRI advances should be granted through rural and semi urban branches. No target for
foreign banks.
Export Credit: Export credit is not a part of priority sector for domestic commercial banks.
However, the target for foreign banks is 12 per cent of ANBC or credit equivalent amount of
off balance sheet exposure, whichever is higher.
Weaker Sections
The weaker sections under priority sector include the following:
(a) Small and marginal farmers with land holding of 5 acres and less, and landless
labourers, tenant farmers and share croppers;
(b) Artisans, village and cottage industries where individual credit limits do not exceed
Rs. 50,000;
(c) Beneficiaries of Swarnjayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY);
(d) Scheduled castes and scheduled tribes;
(e) Beneficiaries of DRI scheme;
(f) Beneficiaries under Swarnajayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY);
(g) Beneficiaries under the scheme for liberation and rehabilitation of scavengers (SLRS);
(h) Advances to self-help Groups;
(i) Loans to the distressed poor to pre-pay their debt to informal sector against appropriate
collateral or group security.
18.4 RECENT DEVELOPMENTS IN PRIORITY SECTOR LENDING
During the budget speech 2006-07, Honourable Finance Minister has announced the
Government's decision to ensure that the farmers receive short-term credit at seven per cent
with an upper limit of Rs. 3 lakh on the principal amount.
175
The salient features of the guidelines are:
• The Government will provide interest subvention of 2 per cent p.a. to the banks in
respect of short- term production credit up to Rs, 3 lakh provided to farmers.
• The amount of sub-vention will be calculated on the loan amount from the date of
disbursement/ withdrawal up to the date of payment or up to the date loan becomes overdue.
This subvention will be available to banks on the condition that they make short-term credit
available at the ground level with ROI of 7 per cent per annum.
With the significant changes in the economic environment and the thrust given by
Government of India for doubling of agriculture in the tenth five year plan, it is important to
increase the farmers' participation in the existing extension system. The RBI has advised
banks to form farmers' advisory committee in all rural branches. This committee will play a
vital role in the rural development and it will not only strengthen the extension system, but
will also make it more reliable and transparent by proper planning and resource allocation. A
branch advisory committee comprising of select elected representatives, including women
leaders of local Panchayat Raj institutions, within the service area of the branch, is
established at every rural branch. It should meet at least once in a quarter. These meetings are
made mandatory and are to be attended by the controlling official of the bank.
18.5 LET US SUM UP
Explained in this chapter are various purposes for which banks are granting advances to
agriculture and other allied activities and how is the bank credit essential for development of
our economy keeping in view our large population, rural base of the economy, the limited
resources available and the competition emerging from the liberalisation of the economy. We
have also discussed the other priority sectors and their relevance to the overall economic
development. Various features like targets and sub-targets assigned to both domestic and
foreign banks under each sector and sub-sector are also discussed, when the revised definition
of micro, small and medium enterprises each under manufacturing and services sector was
seen. In conclusion, we have also seen the recent developments in priority sector lending by
commercial banks with a view to bringing farmers in general and the rural poor in particular
within the reach of the extension system and the enhanced flow of bank credit.
18.6 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS
1. Housing Loans granted to individuals up to Rs.----- for construction of houses (excluding
loans granted by banks to their employees) are treated as priority sector advances,
(a) 5 lakh (b) 10 lakh
(c) 20 lakh (d) 15 lakh
2. Educational loans granted to individuals for educational purposes up to Rsfor studies
in India, will be classified as priority sector.
(a) 7.5 lakh (b) 10 lakh
(c) 15 lakh (d) 20 lakh
3. The scheduled commercial banks are expected to enlarge credit to the priority sector
and ensure
that priority sector advances constitute
(a) 18 per cent of net bank credit (b) 40 per cent of net bank credit
(c) 12 per cent of net bank credit (d) 25 per cent of net bank credit
18.7 ANSWERS TO CHECK YOUR PROGRESS'
I.fc). 2. (b\ 3. (b)
.176
18.8 KEYWORDS
Priority sector, Small farmers, Marginal farmers, NABARD, Margin, Weaker sections, Micro
Enterprise, Micro Credit, Differential Rate of Interest Scheme, Indirect Finance, Adjusted Net
Bank Credit (ANBC), Services sector, Housing Loan, DRI Scheme, Subvention.
UNIT
19
AGRICULTURAL FINANCE
STRUCTURE
19.0 Objectives
19.1 Introduction
19.2 Short-Term Loans
19.3 Medium-/Long-Term Loan
19.4 Crop Loan
19.5 Kisan Credit Card
19.6 Agricultural Term Loans
19.7 Land Development
19.8 Minor Irrigation
19.9 Farm Mechanisation
19.10 Finance to Horticulture
19.11 Land Purchase
19.12 Let Us Sum Up
19.13 Check Your Progress
19.14 Answers to 'Check Your Progress'
19.15 Keywords
178
19.0 OBJECTIVES
A study of this unit will help you to understand and evaluate the various aspects of agriculture
finance through banking sector.
19.1 INTRODUCTION
The credit needs of a farmer are met through broad categories of advances viz., direct finance
and indirect finance. Based on the period of credit, direct finance is classified as short-term
loans and medium-/long-term loans.
19.2 SHORT-TERM LOANS
Loans repayable up to 18 months are termed as short-term loans. This includes: crop loan and
the limits sanctioned through Kisan Credit Cards scheme for raising crops, loan against gold
ornaments for agricultural purposes.
19.3 MEDIUM-/LONG-TERM LOAN
The period of credit under this category is more than thirty-six months. This includes loan for
the purpose of minor irrigation, farm/land development, farm mechanization, plantation and
horticulture, allied activities such as dairy farming, sheep/goat raring, piggery and rabbit
farming, poultry farming, fisheries, sericulture, bee-keeping, mushroom cultivation, bio-gas
plants. Indirect finance includes credit for financing distribution of fertilisers, pesticides,
loans granted to Electricity Boards for energising of pump set under Rural Electrification
Corporation (REC) Scheme, finance for construction and running storage facilities in the
producing areas, loans to individuals, institutions or organisations who undertake spraying
operations, advance to State Corporations for onward lending to weaker section. Certain
important features of agricultural loans are given below:
19.4 CROP LOAN
The purpose of the crop loan is to facilitate the agriculturists to carry on seasonal operations,
i.e. to meet the expenses for raising of seasonal crops including the cost of seeds, fertilisers
and pesticides, irrigation charges; labour charges, etc. Agriculturists, tenant farmers and share
croppers who actually cultivate the lands are eligible for these loans. All categories of farmers
- small/marginal (SF/MF) and others are included. Loan amounts are worked out based on the
cost of cultivation (scale of finance) incurred, for each crop per acre of the crop cultivated,
keeping a margin, say of 10 per cent.
19.5 KISAN CREDIT CARD
All farmers who require loan for their cultivation expenses are eligible to get loan under
Kisan credit card scheme.
Purpose: Kisan credit cards can be issued to farmers to meet their cultivation needs and non-
farm requirements, including purchase of inputs and other short-term requirements together
with working capital requirements for allied activities in a flexible and cost effective manner.
Apart from a loan for cultivation purposes, a consumption loan of a certain percentage of
limit is also given for other/household expenses.
Eligibility: Owner cultivators or those engaged in allied activities are eligible for Kisan credit
cards. Farmers cultivating authorised leased lands are also eligible.
179
Credit Limits: Limit is fixed based on the crops proposed to be raised and the area to be
cultivated. The credit extended under the Kisan credit card scheme is in the nature of a
revolving case credit and Provides for any number of withdrawals and repayments within the
limits.certain percentage of increase, say 10 per cent in the limit is allowed every year, to
take care of increase in scale of finance.
Period: Normally, the Kisan credit card is valid for a period of three years subject to an
annual review.
Issuance of Cards: Beneficiaries under the scheme are issued a credit card and a passbook.
The borrowers would be required to produce this over the counter for operating the account.
Documents: Farmers are required to submit land records once in three years only.
19.6 AGRICULTURAL TERM LOANS
Purpose: Agricultural term loans are provided for the purchase of assets (farm machinery,
bullocks, sheep, etc., creation of assets (orchard development, poultry, dairy development,
etc.) connected with rural activities under agriculture, horticulture, plantation, sericulture,
animal husbandry, fisheries, etc., where the loan amount is repayable over a period of time
exceeding three years.
Eligibility: All categories of farmers and agricultural labourers are eligible.
Documents: For activities like purchase of bullocks, etc., there is no need for any supportive
documents. For larger amounts of loan, an estimate/quotation/project report will be called for.
For land based activities, land records are to be produced.
19.7 LAND DEVELOPMENT
Purpose: Credit for land development projects, in the form of direct finance to cultivators, for
better productivity. Loans under this head cover various activities like land clearance
(removal of bushes, trees, etc.), land levelling and shaping, bench terracing for hilly areas,
contour stone walls, staggered contour trenches, disposal drains, reclamation of
saline/alkaline soils and fencing, etc.
Eligibility: All farmers owning agricultural land are eligible.
Documents to be submitted: The borrower has to produce a report on the estimated cost,
supported by estimates of an engineer.
19.8 MINOR IRRIGATION
Purpose: Credit for the creation of irrigation facilities from underground/surface water
sources. All structures and equipments connected with the proposed facility are also financed.
Loans covering various activities like digging of new wells (open/borewells), deepening of
existing wells (traditional/bore), energising of wells (oil engine/electrical pump set), laying of
pipe lines, installing drip/sprinkler irrigation system and lift irrigation system.
Eligibility: All those farmers who are having known source of water, which is usable for
irrigation purposes.
Documents to be submitted: An estimate for the civil works to be undertaken and quotations
for the assets to be purchased are required. Land records to ascertain the title to the property,
a Geologist certificate and a feasibility certificate from the electricity board, where relevant.
19.9 FARM MECHANISATION
Purpose: Credit for the purchase of farm equipments and machinery for agricultural
operations. The
180
scheme covers activities ranging from purchase of tractors and accessories, trailers, power
tillers, combine harvesters, power sprayers, dusters, threshers etc.
Eligibility: Farmers owning a minimum of 8 acres of perennially irrigated lands are eligible.
Eligibility for purchase of other farm equipments is dependent on the income generated by
the agricultural activity undertaken by the borrower.
Documents to be submitted: Quotation for the assets to be purchased has to be submitted.
Land records to ascertain cultivation rights/title to the property are also required.
19.10 FINANCE TO HORTICULTURE
Purpose: Loans for development of fruit orchards like mango, chikoo, guava, grapes,
pomegranate, apple, lechee, etc., as well as short-term fruit crops (banana, pineapple, etc.),
flowers in open and green houses (roses, carnation, chrysanthemums, jasmine, etc.) and
vegetable crops (potato, tomato, brinjal, gourds, peas, etc.) are financed.
Eligibility: All farmers having cultivable lands.
Documents to be submitted: For orchard development, the borrower has to submit the
following:
(i) Water and soil test report
(ii) A feasibility certificate from the local horticulture department
(iii) Land records
(iv) Quotation/estimates for the costs to be incurred
(v) If the project is large than a project report.
19.11 LAND PURCHASE
Purpose: Loan to small and marginal farmers/landless labourers for purchase of agricultural
land.
Eligibility: Small/marginal farmers, tenants, sharecroppers subject to land holding criteria.
Security: Land purchased with the bank finance will be mortgaged as security. No other
security will be insisted upon.
Repayment: Normally, repayment of loan will be half yearly/yearly instalments depending on
the harvest of the crops or the liquidity created by the agricultural activity undertaken over a
period of ten years. Adequate gestation period is allowed for development of land.
19.12 LET US SUM UP
The credit needs of a farmer are met through broad categories of agricultural advances viz.,
direct finance and indirect finance. Based on the period of credit, direct finance is classified
as short-term loans and medium-/long-term loans. Direct finance to agriculture is provided to
farmers for short-term purposes like cultivation of crops or for other medium-/long-term
purposes like, among others, land development or for augmenting water resources. A novel
offering by banks to farmers for meeting their cultivation needs and other non-farm
requirements, including consumption needs in timely manner and without any procedural
delay by banks is Kisan Credit Cards. With these cards issued to farmers, they can draw
amounts from banks whenever needed by them and up to a pre-fixed limit. Finance is also
provided by banks for undertaking allied activities like dairy development, poultry farming,
bee keeping, sericulture, piggeries, pisciculture, sheep/goat rearing, etc., Indirect finance to
agriculture includes credit for distribution of fertilisers and other inputs used by farmers in
agricultural operations. Finance for construction and running of warehouse facilities in the
producing areas and advances to State
181
Electricity Boards for energising wells in villages and to State corporations for onward,
lending to weaker sections also come under this category.
19.13 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS
1. Kisan Cards are issued to farmers
(a) to withdraw money from ATM in rural branches
(b) to purchase farm equipments
(c) to purchase agricultural implements on credit from dealers
(d) to meet their cultivation needs and non-farm requirements, including purchase of
inputs and other short-term requirements and working capital requirements for allied
activities
2. Under farm mechanization scheme, loan is given for
(a) providing irrigation facilities (b) cultivation expenses
(c) purchase of farm equipments (d) for digging wells
19.14 ANSWERS TO 'CHECK YOUR PROGRESS'
1. (d), 2. (c).
19.15 KEYWORDS
Agriculture, Horticulture, Kisan Credit Cards, Farm Mechanization, Direct Finance, Indirect
Finance, Crop Loan, Minor irrigation, Drip Irrigation, Sprinkler Irrigation, Sericulture,
Pisciculture, Dairy Development, Plantation Crops, Warehousing.
MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES IN INDIA
STRUCTURE
20.0 Objectives
20.1 Introduction
20.2 Aim of MSMEs
20.3 Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development (MSMED) Act, 2006
20.4 Policy Package for MSMEs - Credit/Finance
20.5 Delayed Payments
20.6 Performance and Credit Rating Scheme
20.7 Let Us Sum Up
20.8 Check Your Progress
20. 9 Answers to 'Check Your Progress'
20.10 Keywords
184
20.0 OBJECTIVES
This unit will facilitate the reader to understand the concept of Micro, Small and Medium
Enterprises (MSMEs) and their development in India through decades after independence.
20.1 INTRODUCTION
With the advent of planned economy from 1951 and the subsequent industrial policy pursued
by Government of India, both the planners and the Government earmarked a special role for
the small scale industries and medium scale industries in the Indian economy. Due protection
was accorded to both sectors and particularly for the small scale industries from 1951 to
1991, till the nation adopted a policy of liberalisation and globalisation.
The policy for Small, Tiny and Village Enterprises of August 1991 laid the framework for
government support in the context of liberalisation, which sought to replace protection with
competitiveness to infuse more vitality and growth to MSMEs in the face of foreign
competition and open market. Supportive measures concentrated on improving infrastructure,
technology and quality. The Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) and a
Technology Development and Modernisation Fund (TDMF) were created to accelerate
finance and technical services to the sector. The delayed Payment Act was enacted to
facilitate prompt payment of dues to MSMEs.
The Ministry of MSME (earlier known as Ministry of Small Scale Industries and Agro &
Rural Industries) came into being from 1999 to provide focused attention to the development
and promotion of this sector. The new Policy Package announced in August 2000 sought to
address the persisting problems relating to credit, infrastructure, technology, and marketing
more effectively. A credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme was launched to encourage
technology upgradation in the MSME sector and a Credit Guarantee Scheme was started to
provide collateral-free loans to micro and small entrepreneurs, particularly the first generation
entrepreneurs. The exemption limit for relief from payment of Central Excise duty was raised
to Rs. one crore and a Market Development Assistance Scheme for MSMEs was introduced.
At the same time, consultations were held with stakeholders and the list of products reserved
for production in the MSME Sector was gradually reduced year by year. In 2006, the long-
awaited enactment for this sector finally became a reality with the passage of the Micro,
Small and Medium Enterprises Act. In March 2007, a package for the promotion of Micro
and Small Enterprises was announced which comprises the proposals/schemes having direct
impact on the promotion and development of the micro and small enterprises, particularly in
view of the fast changing economic environment wherein to be competitive is the key to
success.
As seen above, MSMEs always represented the model of socio-economic policies of the
Government of India which emphasised a judicious use of foreign exchange for import of
capital goods and inputs; a labour intensive mode of production; employment generation;
non-concentration or diffusion of economic power in the hands of few; discouraging
monopolistic practices of production and marketing; and finally an effective contribution to
foreign exchange earning of the nation with low import intensive operations, coupled with the
policy of decongestion or diffusion of industrial activities in few geographical centres.
20.2 AIM OF MSMEs
It can be observed that MSMEs in India have met the expectations of the Government in this
respect. MSMEs developed in a manner, which made it possible for them to achieve the
following objectives:
• High contribution to domestic production
185
• Significant export earnings
• Low investment requirements
• Operational flexibility
• Mobility
• Low intensive imports
• Capacities to develop an appropriate indigenous technology
• Import substitution
• Contribution towards defence production
• Technology-oriented industries
• Competitiveness in domestic and export markets
At the same time, one has to understand the limitations of MSMEs, which are:
• Low capital base
• Concentration of functions in one/two persons
• Inadequate exposure to international environment
• Inability to face impact of WTO regime
• Inadequate contribution towards R&D
• Lack of professionalism
In spite of these limitations, the MSMEs have made significant contribution towards
technological development and exports. MSMEs are established in almost all the major
sectors in the Indian industry such as:
Food processing Agricultural inputs
Chemicals and Pharmaceuticals Engineering; Electricals; Electronics
Electro-medical equipment Textiles and garments
Leather and leather goods Meat products
Bio Engineering Sports goods
Plastics products computer software etc.
Resulting from globalisation and liberalisation, coupled with the WTO regime, Indian
MSMEs have been passing through a transitional period. With a slowing down of the western
economies, particularly USA and European Union and enhanced competition from China and
a few low cost centres of production from abroad, many units in India have been facing a
tough time. Those MSMEs who have a strong technological base, international business
outlook, competitive spirit and willingness to restructure themselves shall withstand the
present challenges and come out with flying colours to make their own contribution to the
Indian economy.
20.3 MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES DEVELOPMENT (MSMED) ACT,
2006
The Government of India vide its notification dated 16.6.2006 enacted an Act named "Micro,
Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006" (MSMED Act, 2006). This Act has
been made effective from 2 October, 2006 as per the notification dated 18 July, 2006. In this
Act, the word 'Enterprise' replaces the word 'Industry'. The 'enterprises' in this Act have been
classified as micro, small and medium. Based on their activities, these enterprises have been
further categorised as manufacturing enterprises and service.
The MSMED Act, 2006 has defined the micro, small and medium enterprises in both the
manufacturing and services sector as follows:
'Enterprise' means an industrial undertaking or a business concern or any other establishment
engaged
186
in the manufacture or production of goods in any manner, pertaining to any industry specified
in the first schedule to the Industries (Development and Regulations) Act, 1951 or engaged in
providing or rendering of any service or services. The three categories of enterprises, viz.,
micro, medium and small, both under manufacturing and services sectors are described as in
Table 20.1.
TABLE 20.1: Description of Micro, Small and Medium Sectors
Enteprises
Micro
Small
Medium Manufacturing sector
Where the investment in plant and machinery does not exceed Rs. 25 lakh. (Currently called
as Tiny Sector)
Where the investment in plant and machinery is more than Rs. 25 lakh but does not exceed
Rs. 5 crore.
Where the investment in plant and machinery is more than Rs. 5 crore but does not exceed
Rs. 10 crore.
Services sector
Where the investment in equipment does not exceed Rs. 10 lakh. (Currently called as
SSSBEs).
Where the investment in equipment is more than Rs. 10 lakh but does not exceed Rs. 2 crore.
Where the investment in equipment is more than Rs. 2 crore but does not exceed Rs. 5 crore.
Note: Hitherto SSIs were units with an investment limit up to Rs. 1 crore and for select items
up to Rs. 5 crore. Now the investment ceiling has been increased to Rs. 5 crore for all SSIs.
Further hitherto, Services Sector under SMEs were not defined but now defined.
The Act seeks to facilitate the development of these enterprises as also enhance their
competitiveness. It provides the first-ever legal framework for recognition of the concept of
"Enterprise" which comprises both manufacturing and service entities. It defines medium
enterprises for the first time and seeks to integrate the three tiers of these enterprises, namely,
micro, small and medium. The Act also provides for a statutory consultative mechanism at
the national level with balanced representation of all sections of stakeholders, particularly the
three classes of enterprises; and with a wide range of advisory functions. Establishment of
specific funds for the promotion, development and enhancing competitiveness of these
enterprises, notification of schemes/ programmes for this purpose, progressive credit policies
and practices, more effective mechanisms for mitigating the problems of delayed payments to
micro and small enterprises and assurance of a scheme for easing the closure of business by
these enterprises are some of the other features of the Act.
The Ministry of MSME has also taken a view, in the light of the liberalised provisions of the
MSMED Act 2006, to do away with the restrictive 24% ceiling prescribed for equity holding
by industrial undertak¬ings, whether domestic or foreign, in the MSMEs. This coupled with
an expected legislation on Limited Liability Partnerships (introduced in the parliament by the
Ministry of Corporate Affairs) should pave the way for greater corporatisation of the Small
and Medium Enterprises - thereby enhancing their access to equity and other funds from the
market of these products in keeping with the global standards.
20.4 POLICY PACKAGE FOR MSMEs - CREDIT/FINANCE
Credit is one of the critical inputs for the promotion and development of MSMEs. Some of
the features of the existing credit policy and those evolving for the MSMEs are:
(i) Credit to the MSMEs is part of the Priority Sector Lending Policy of banks. For the public
and private sector banks, 40 per cent of the net bank credit (NBC) is earmarked for the
priority sector. For the foreign banks, however, 32 per cent of the NBC is earmarked for the
priority sector, of which 10 per cent is earmarked for the MSME sector. Any shortfall in this
by the foreign banks has to be deposited in the Small Enterprise Development Fund (SEDF)
set up by the Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI).
187
(ii) The SIDBI is the principal financial institution for promotion, financing and development
of the MSME sector. Apart from extending financial assistance to the sector, it coordinates
the functions of institutions engaged in similar activities. SIDBI's major operations are in the
areas of
(a) refinance assistance
(b) direct lending
(c) development and support services
(iii) Commercial banks are important channels of credit dispensation to the sector and play a
pivotal role in financing the working capital requirements, besides providing term loans.
(iv) At the state level, State Financial Corporations (SFCs) and twin-function State Industrial
Development Corporations (SIDCs) are the major sources of long-term funds, (v)
Recognising the importance of easy and adequate availability of finance in sustainable
growth of the MSME sector, the Government has announced a "Policy Package for Stepping
up Credit to MSMEs", with the objective of doubling the flow of credit to this sector within a
period of five years and the banks have been accordingly directed to ensure that there is at
least a 20 per cent year on year growth in credit to MSMEs in order to double the credit in
five years.
(vi) The banks have also been directed that each rural and semi-urban branch should provide
credit cover to at least five new micro/small/medium enterprises including agro-rural
industries and artisans per year.
(vii) Faced with the increased competition on account of globalisation, MSMEs are beginning
to move from bank credit to a variety of other specialised financial services and options. In
recent years, the sector has witnessed increased flow of capital in the form of
primary/secondary securities market, venture capital and private equity, external commercial
borrowings, factoring services, etc. More advanced MSMEs have started realising the
importance of these alternative sources of finance and the consequent need for adopting
better governance norms to take advantage of these funding sources.
(viii) Efforts are on to put in place Limited Liability Partnership Act so as to provide a thrust
to MSMEs in their move towards corporatisation.
20.5 DELAYED PAYMENTS
The MSMED Act has provisions to safeguard the interests of SMEs by putting penalty
clauses on delayed payments. When the buyer of goods fails to make the payment of the
amount to the supplier within a period of forty-five days, the buyer shall be liable to pay
compound interest to the supplier on the amount with monthly interest at three times of the
bank rate. The amount of interest payable or paid by the buyer is disallowed as a deduction
under the IT Act. The Act also has provisions for the establishment of MSE facilitation
council for dispute resolution within a framework in ninety days. The Act has
provisions/clauses for credit facilities (as per guidelines or instructions issued by RBI),
procurement preference policy, funds, grants by the Central Government and administration
and utilisation of funds.
20.6 PERFORMANCE AND CREDIT RATING SCHEME
As per the scheme approved by the Government of India and launched in April, 2005 for
performance and credit rating of manufacturing MSEs, the National Small Industries
Corporation (NSIC) empanels credit rating agencies for rating of small enterprises engaged in
manufacturing activities. The rating scheme aims at helping them in accessing credit from
banks faster and at competitive terms. The Government of India also provides a subsidy to
these enterprises for getting rated to the extent of 75 per cent of the charges/fees paid to the
rating agency subject to a maximum of Rs. 40,000.
188
20.7 LET US SUM UP
The MSMEs fulfil not only the economic objectives but also the social needs. However, in
view of the intense competition from large enterprises, they need special protection and
support from the Government, for their survival and growth. This has been provided by the
Government and the Reserve bank of India through their various directives, policy
prescriptions and guidelines. Accordingly, banks have been advised to earmark certain per
cent of Net Bank Credit to this sector and allocations should also be made among the sub-
sectors within the overall exposure to MSME sector by banks.
The Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development (MSMED) Act, 2006 was enacted
in 2006 which has redefined micro, medium and small enterprises in both the manufacturing
and services sectors. The Act provides the first-ever legal framework for recognition of the
concept of 'enterprise' which comprises both manufacturing and service entities. It defines
medium enterprises for the first time.
The Act has provisions for penalty for delayed payments so as to protect MSMEs. A rating
scheme has come into being for credit rating of manufacturing MSMEs so as to enable them
to access banks for faster and cheaper credit. Certain policy packages for the healthy growth
of MSME sector were also announced by the Government and Reserve Bank.
20.8 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS
1. A micro enterprise in manufacturing sector is one where the investment in plant and
machinery does not exceed Rs.
(a) Rs. 10 lakh(b) Rs. 20 lakh
(c) Rs. 25 lakh(d) Rs. 50 lakh
2. The Government of India also provides subsidy to the SSI units for getting rated to
the extent of 75 per cent of the charges/fees paid to the rating agency by the SSI units subject
to a maximum of Rs
(a) Rs. 40,000 (b) Rs. 60,000
(c) Rs. 75,000 (d) Rs. 1 lakh
3. A medium enterprise in service sector is one,
(a) Where the investment in equipment is more than Rs. 3 crore but does not exceed Rs.
10 crore.
(b) Where the investment in equipment is more than Rs. 2 crore but does not exceed Rs.
10 crore.
(c) Where the investment in equipment is more than Rs. 5 crore but does not exceed Rs.
10 crore.
(d) Where the investment in equipment is more than Rs. 2 crore but does not exceed Rs. 5
crore.
20.9 ANSWERS TO 'CHECK YOUR PROGRESS'
1. (c), 2. (a), 3. (d).
20.10 KEYWORDS
Liberalisation, Globalisation, Low Intensive Imports, WTO, Import Substitution, Enterprise,
Manufacturing Sector, Service Sector. Technology Upgradation, Payment Protection.
GOVERNMENT SPONSORED SCHEMES
STRUCTURE
21.0 Objectives
21.1 Swarnajayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY)
21.1.1 Skill Upgradation/Training
21.1.2 Activity Clusters, Key Activities
21.1.3 Self-Help Groups (SHGs) under SGSY
21.1.4 Definition of Family and Wilful Defaulter
21.1.5 Revolving Fund
21.1.6 Lending Norms
21.1.7 Insurance Cover
21.1.8 Security Norms
21.1.9 Subsidy
21.1.10 Post Credit Follow Up
21.1.11Repayment of Loan
21.1.12 Recovery
21.1.13 Refinance of SGSY Loans
21.2 Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY)
21.2.1 Urban Self-Employment Programme (USEP)
21.2.2 Development of Women and Children in Urban Areas (DWCUA)
21.2.3 Guidelines
21.2.4 Administration of Subsidy
21.3 Prime Minister's Rozgar Yojana (PMRY)
21.3.1 Introduction
21.3.2 Target Group
21.3.3 Reservation
21.3.4 Eligibility Norms
21.3.5 Other Conditions
21.3.6 Eligible Activities
21.3.7 Project Funding
21.3.8 Joint Ventures/Partnerships
190.
213.8 Financing for SHGs under PMRY
21.3.9 Other Aspects: Deceased borrowers
21.4 Scheme of Liberation and Rehabilitation of Scavengers (SLRS)
21.4.1 The Scheme
21.4.2 Salient Features
21.4.3 Funding
21.4.4 Eligibility
21.4.5 Security
21.4.6 Repayment
21.4.7 Other Aspects
21.5 Let Us Sum Up
21.6 Check Your Progress
21.7 Answers to 'Check Your Progress'
21.8 Keywords
191
21.0 OBJECTIVES
A study of this unit will help you to appreciate the important Government sponsored schemes
like Swarnajayanti Gram Swarozga Yojana, Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana, and the
Prime Minister's Rozgar Yojana.
21.1 SWARNAJAYANTI GRAM SWAROZGAR YOJANA (SGSY)
Government of India has launched a new programme known as 'Swarnajayanti Gram
Swarozgar Yojana' (SGSY) by restructuring the following existing schemes:
(a) Integrated Rural Development Programme (IRDP)
(b) Training of Rural Youth for Self-Employment (TRYSEM)
(c) Development of Women and Children in Rural Areas (DWCRA)
(d) Supply of Improved Toolkits to Rural Artisans (SITRA)
(e) Ganga Kalyan Yojana (GKY)
(f) Million Wells Scheme (MWS)
The SGSY Scheme is operative from 1 April, 1999 in the rural areas of the country. The
scheme is funded by the Centre and the States in the ratio of 75:25 and will be implemented
by commercial banks, regional rural banks and cooperative banks. Other financial
institutions, Panchayat Raj institutions, district rural development agencies (DRDAs), Non-
Government Organisations (NGOs), technical institutions in the district, will also be involved
in the process of planning, implementation and monitoring of the scheme.
The scheme aims at establishing a large number of micro enterprises in the rural areas. The
list of below poverty line (BPL) households, identified through the BPL census, duly
approved by gram sabha, will form the basis for the identification of families for assistance
under SGSY. The objective of SGSY is to bring the assisted poor families (Swarozgaris)
above the poverty line by ensuring an appreciable sustained income over a period of time.
This objective is to be achieved by, inter alia, organising the rural poor into self-help groups
(SHGs) through the process of social mobilisation, training, capacity building and provision
of income generating assets. The rural poor such as those with land, landless labour, educated
unemployed, rural artisans and disabled are all covered under the scheme.
The assisted poor families, known as Swarozgaris, can be either individuals or groups and
would be selected from BPL families by a three member team consisting of block
development officer (BDO), banker and sarpanch.
SGSY will focus on the vulnerable sections of the rural poor. Accordingly, the SC/ST will
account for at least 50 per cent, Women 40 per cent, and the disabled 3 per cent of those
assisted.
21.1.1 Skill Upgradation/Training
Once the person or a group of persons has been identified for assistance, their training needs
are also to be ascertained with reference to the minimum skill requirement. This programme
includes elements of book keeping, knowledge of market, identification and appraisal,
acquaintance with product costing, product pricing, familiarisation with project financing by
banks as well as basic skills in the key activity identified.
21.1.2 Activity Clusters, Key Activities
The focus under the scheme should be on development of activity clusters with emphasis on
key activities identified in the block, both for the group as well as for individual assistance.
The activity clusters would be in geographic clusters of neighbouring villages within a
reasonable radius. However, assistance is not prohibited for other activities.
192
21.1.3 Self-Help Groups (SHGs) under SGSY
The self-help groups shall be organised by 'Swarozgaris' drawn from the BPL list approved
by the gram sabha. The scheme provides for the formation of self-help groups (SHGs),
nurturing and their linkages with banks. The assistance (loan-cum-subsidy) may be extended
to individuals in a group or to all members in the group for taking up income generation
activities.
Group activities will be given preference and progressively, the majority of the funding will
be for Self-Help groups. Half of the groups formed at the block level should be exclusively
women groups.
21.1.4 Definition of Family and Wilful Defaulter
'BPL Family' under the guidelines would be treated as a unit for the purpose of giving income
generating assets. The 'Family' would consist of members of a household and united by ties
of marriage, blood and adoption. The family would consist of husband, wife, dependent
parents/sons/daughters/brothers and sisters. The moment a parent/son/daughter/brother/sister
is no longer dependent and has a separate household, he will no longer be a member of the
same BPL family.
The term 'Wilful Defaulter' is defined as 'one who is capable of repaying the loan, but has
been defaulting intentionally and not repaying the loan deliberately and wilfully'. It is
desirable that wilful defaulters should not be financed under SGSY. In case wilful defaulters
are members of a group, they might be allowed to benefit from the thrift and credit activities
of the group including the corpus built up with the assistance of revolving fund. But at the
stage of assistance for economic activities, the wilful defaulters should not have the benefit of
further assistance until the outstanding loans are repaid. Wilful defaulters of the group should
not get benefits under the SGSY scheme and the group may be financed excluding such
defaulters.
21.1.5 Revolving Fund
SHGs that are in existence for about six months and have demonstrated the potential of a
viable group enters the stage, wherein it receives the revolving fund from DRDA and banks,
as cash credit facility. The revolving fund is provided to the groups to augment the group
corpus so as to enable a larger number of members to avail loans and also to facilitate an
increase in the per capita loan available to the members. The revolving fund imparts credit
discipline and financial management skills to the members, so that they become credit
worthy. SHGs that have demonstrated their successful existence, will receive assistance for
economic activities under the scheme.
21.1.6 Lending Norms
The size of loan under the scheme would depend on the nature of project. There is no
investment ceiling other than the unit cost, i.e. investment requirement worked out for the
project. The loans under the scheme would be a composite loan comprising both a term loan
and working capital. The loan component and the admissible subsidy together would be equal
to total project cost. Disbursements up to Rs. 10,000/- under industry, service and business
(ISB) sector may be made in cash where a number of items are to be bought.
(i) Group Loans
Ideally, under the group loan, the group should take up a single activity, but if necessary, the
group could also take up multiple activities under the group loan. In either case, the loan will
be sanctioned in the name of the group and the group stands as the guarantor to the bank, for
prompt repayment of loan. The group is entitled to a subsidy of 50 per cent of the project
cost, subject to per capita subsidy of Rs. 10,000/- or Rs. 1.25 lakh, whichever is less.
193
ii) Multiple Doses of Credit
Emphasis is laid on multiple doses of assistance. This would mean assisting a Swarozgari
over a period of time with a second and subsequent dose(s) of credit, enabling him/her to
cross the poverty line, as also access higher amounts of credit. Subsidy entitlement for all
doses taken together should not exceed the limit prescribed for that category.
(iii) Interest Rates
Loans under the scheme will carry an interest as per the directives on interest rates issued by
the Reserve Bank of India from time to time. However, the rates of interest to be charged on
group loans under SGSY may be linked to per capita size of the loans, so as to mitigate the
burden on the BPL beneficiaries.
(iv) Loan Applications
Time limit for disposal of applications: All loans granted under the scheme are to be treated
as advances under priority sector. Loan applications under the scheme should be disposed of
within the prescribed time limit of fifteen days and at any rate, not later than one month.
(a) Rejection of loan applications: If some loan applications are rejected by the branch
managers, the reason for rejection should be clearly recorded on the application form itself
and the relevant application should be returned to the sponsoring authority immediately for
their information and further action as they deem necessary.
21.1.7 Insurance Cover
Insurance cover is available for assets/live stock bought out of the loan. Swarozgaris are
covered under the group insurance scheme.
Insurance coverage of the SGSY Swarozgaris: The maximum age of Swarozgaris at the time
of sanction has to be kept at sixty years of age. The insurance coverage, however, would be
for five years or till the loan is repaid, whichever is earlier, irrespective of the age of
Swarozgaris at the time of sanction of loan.
21.1.8 Security Norms
For individual loans up to Rs. 50,000 and group loans up to Rs. 5 lakh, the assets created out
of the bank loan would be hypothecated to the bank as a primary security. In case where
movable assets are not created, as in land based activities such as dug well, minor irrigation,
etc., mortgage of land may be obtained. Where mortgage of land is not possible, third party
guarantee may be obtained at the discretion of the bank.
For all individual loans exceeding Rs. 50,000 and group loans exceeding Rs. 5 lakh, in
addition to the primary security such as hypothecation/mortgage of land or third-party
guarantee as the case may be, suitable margin money/other collateral security in the form of
an insurance policy; marketable security/ deeds of other property, etc., may be obtained at the
discretion of the bank. The upper ceiling of Rs. 5 lakh is irrespective of the size of the group
or pro rata per capita loan to the group. While deciding the limit for collateral security, the
total project cost (bank loan plus Government subsidy) should be taken into consideration by
banks.
21.1.9 Subsidy
Subsidy under SGSY will be uniform at 30 per cent of the project cost, subject to a maximum
of Rs 7,500. In respect of SC/STs it will be 50 per cent of the project cost, subject to a
maximum of Rs. 10,000. The group is entitled to subsidy of 50 per cent of the project cost
subject to a per capita subsidy
194
of Rs. 10,000 or Rs. 1.25 lakh, whichever is less. There will be no monetary limit on subsidy
for irriga¬tion projects. Subsidy under SGSY will be back ended. Banks should not charge
interest on the subsidy potion of the loan amount.
21.1.10 Post-Credit Follow Up
Loan pass books in regional languages may be issued to the Swarozgaris which may contain
all the details of the loans disbursed to them.
21.1.11Repayment of Loan
All SGSY loans are to be treated as medium-term loans with minimum repayment period of
five years. Instalments for repayment of loan will be fixed as per the unit cost approved by
the NABARD/Dist. SGSY Committee.
Swarozgaris will not be entitled for any benefit of subsidy if the loan is fully repaid before
the prescribed lock-in period. The repayment period for various activities under SGSY can
broadly be categorised into five, seven and nine years depending on the project. The
corresponding lock-in period would be three, four and five years respectively. If the loan is
fully repaid before the currency period, the Swarozgaris will be entitled only to pro rata
subsidy.
21.1.12 Recovery
Prompt recovery of loans is necessary to ensure the success of the programme. The banks
may engage the services of NGOs or individuals (other than government servants) as
monitoring-cum-recovery facilitators, on a commission basis.
21.1.13 Refinance of SGSY Loans
Banks are eligible for refinance from NABARD for the loans disbursed under SGSY as per
their guidelines.
21.2 SWARNA JAYANTI SHAHARI ROZGAR YOJANA (SJSRY)
Government of India has launched a rationalised poverty alleviation scheme called the
'Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana' replacing three existing schemes, viz.,
• Nehru Rozgar Yojana (NRY),
• Urban Basic Services for the Poor (UBSP), and
• Prime Minister's Integrated Urban Poverty Eradication Programme (PMIUPEP)
The scheme contains all essential features of the three schemes and is operative from 1
December 1997 in all urban towns in India. SJSRY seeks to provide gainful employment to
the urban poor (living below the urban poverty line) unemployed or under-employed, through
setting up of self-employment ventures or provision of wage employment. Inputs under the
scheme would be delivered both through the medium of community structures to be set up on
UBSP pattern and urban local bodies (ULBs). The scheme is to be funded on a 75:25 basis,
between the Centre and the States.
Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana consists of two special schemes, namely -
• The Urban Self-Employment Programme (USEP)
• The Urban Wage Employment Programme (UWEP)
21.2.1 Urban Self-Employment Programme (USEP)
Assistance to individual urban poor beneficiaries for setting up gainful self-employment
ventures. Identification: A house-to-house survey for identification of genuine beneficiaries
should be done.
195
Non-economic parameters also should be applied to identify the urban poor in addition to the
economic criteria of the urban poverty line. Community structures like community
development societies (CDS) should be involved in this task under the guidance of the town
urban poverty eradication cell (TUPEC)/ Urban local bodies (ULBs).
Eligibility: Under-employed and unemployed urban youth whose annual family income is
below the poverty line and who have got education up to the ninth standard shall be assisted
with a bank loan and Government subsidy.
Minimum/Maximum age limit: No age limit is prescribed.
Definition of family: Identification of the family will have to be done on the basis of
independent kitchen.
Coverage: SJSRY would be implemented in all areas falling under the jurisdiction of ULBs
of any category, irrespective of population size. The scheme is applicable to all urban towns
in India and is implemented on a whole town basis with special emphasis on urban poor
clusters including those in the metropolitan cities. However, UWEP (Urban Wage
Employment Programme), a component of SJSRY, applies to all urban local bodies, the
population of which was less than 5 lakh as per the 1991 Census.
Project cost: Project cost up to Rs 50,000 is provided under the scheme in case of an
individual. If two or more eligible persons join together in a partnership, the project with
higher costs would also be covered provided the share of each person in the project cost is Rs.
50,000 or less.
Subsidy: Subsidy would be provided at the rate of 15 per cent of the project cost, subject to a
ceiling of Rs. 7,500 per beneficiary (for individual USEP). In case of more than one
beneficiary who join together and set a project under partnership, subsidy would be
calculated for each partner separately at the rate of 15 per cent of his share in the project cost
limited to Rs. 7,500 per partner.
Margin money: The borrower has to bring in 5 per cent of the project cost as margin money.
Partnerships would be permitted, wherein the overall project cost will be a simple sum of
individual project cost allowable per borrower. Such project would be eligible for subsidy
equal to the total permitted subsidy per person and each member would have to bring in 5 per
cent of his share of project cost as margin money.
Repayment: Repayment schedule ranges from three to seven years, after initial moratorium of
six to eighteen months, as decided by the bank.
Physical targets: Physical targets under the USEP of SJSRY are decided by the State
Governments in conformity with the guidelines of the scheme as also the result of beneficiary
survey to ensure adequate flexibility of operation of the scheme.
21.2.2 Development of Women and Children in Urban Areas (DWCUA)
Activities: The programme envisages special incentives to the urban poor women who decide
to set up self-employment ventures in a group. Such groups may take up any economic
activity suited to their skill, training, aptitude and local conditions.
DWCUA group shall consist of at least ten urban poor women and will be entitled to a
subsidy of Rs. 1,25,000 or 50 per cent of the cost of project, whichever is less. Every effort
should be made to encourage the group to set itself up as a thrift and credit society.
Loan component: If the project cost is up to Rs 2,50,000: The loan component would be,
project cost less 50 per cent subsidy and less margin money (5 per cent of the project cost).
Loan component if the project cost exceeds Rs 2,50,000: No maximum ceiling is prescribed
for the project cost. In cases where the project cost exceeds Rs. 2, 50,000 for the DWCUA
Group, the project
196
cost less subsidy (Rs 1,25,000) and margin money (at the rate of 5 per cent of the project
cost), would be the component of bank loan.
Margin money: Five per cent of the project cost will be contributed as margin money by the
group as a whole.
Repayment of loan: Same as under USEP for individual self-employment.
Income criteria: Each member of the Group should fulfil the urban poverty norms as per
official methodology as decided by the Planning Commission. The beneficiaries under
SJSRY will be identified on the basis of a monthly per capita income and not by the annual
family income.
21.2.3 Guidelines
Sub-targets: The percentage of women beneficiaries under the SJSRY Scheme shall not be
less than 30 per cent. SCs/STs must be benefited to the extent of the proportion of their
strength in the local population. A special provision of 3 per cent shall be made for the
disabled under the scheme.
Priority sector status: The loans granted under the scheme should be treated as advances
under the priority sector and accordingly the loan applications should be disposed of
expeditiously within the time schedule prescribed in this regard, i.e. applications for loans up
to Rs. 25,000 within a fortnight and those for credit limits above Rs. 25,000, within eight to
nine weeks.
Rejection of applications: Branch managers may reject applications (except in respect of
SC/ST) and such cases of rejections are to be verified subsequently by the divisional/regional
managers. In case of proposals from SCs/STs, rejection should be at a level higher than that
of a branch manager. Further, rejection of applications should not be on flimsy grounds. The
reasons of rejection may also be commu¬nicated to the sponsoring agency while returning
the applications.
Security: An entrepreneur eligible for assistance under the self-employment scheme can take
a composite loan up to Rs. 50,000/- and group loans up to Rs. 3 lakh which would not require
a collateral/guarantee. Besides margin, as also the subsidy by the Government, the borrower
would hypothecate/mortgage/ pledge to the bank the assets created out of bank loan.
Rate of interest: Loans under the scheme will carry interest as per the directives on interest
rates issued by Reserve Bank of India from time to time.
Defaulter: A defaulter to a bank/financial institution will not be eligible for assistance under
the scheme.
21.2.4 Administration of Subsidy
It should be noted that the subsidy under USEP/DWCUA component of SJSRY is to be
treated as back-ended subsidy with a lock-in period of two years. The subsidy amount may be
utilised/adjusted towards repayment of the loan at the time of maturity. The subsidy
admissible to the borrower should be kept in the subsidy reserve fund account borrower-wise.
Further, no interest will be paid on the subsidy amount held by the banks and, for the purpose
of charging interest on loan amount, the subsidy amount would be excluded from there.
21.3 PRIME MINISTER'S ROZGAR YOJANA (PMRY)
21.3.1 Introduction
The Prime Minister's Rozgar Yojana (PMRY) has been designed to provide employment to
the educated unemployed youth by setting up of micro enterprises by the educated
unemployed poor. It relates to the setting up of the self-employment ventures for industries,
services and business. The scheme covers the whole of the country.
197
21.3.2 Target Group
The scheme covers all educated youth with the minimum qualification of VIII Standard
(passed). Preference will be given to those who have been trained for any trade in Govt.
recognised/approved institutions for a duration of at least six months.
21.3.3 Reservation
Preference should be given to weaker sections including women. The scheme envisages 22.5
per cent reservation for SC/ST and 27 per cent for other backward classes (OBCs).
21.3.4 Eligibility Norms
All educated unemployed youth between the age of 18 and 35 years on the date of receipt of
application by the concerned DIC will be eligible for loan under the scheme in general with a
ten years relaxation for SC/ST/Ex-servicemen/physically handicapped and women, i.e. up to
the age of 45. Educated/ unemployed youth with a minimum qualification of VIII Standard
(passed). Preference is to be given to persons who have received training in any trade in a
Government recognised/approved institution (ITI, etc.) for a minimum duration of six
months. Applicants with higher qualifications or who are still pursuing further course of
studies after their matriculation are also eligible for assistance. The annual family income
should not be more than Rs. 1 lakh per annum and the beneficiary should be a permanent
resident of the area for three years. Here 'Area' means the district.
21.3.5 Other Conditions
A defaulter to a bank/financial institution will not be eligible for assistance under the scheme.
Further, if a member of a family is a defaulter other members of the family will not be
eligible for assistance.
More than one member of the same family may not be assisted under the scheme. However,
another member of the same family having been assisted under any other Central/State/State
owned Corporation sponsored scheme (with/without subsidy) need not be a bar to assistance
under PMRY.
A person who had been earlier assisted under a subsidy-linked programme will not be eligible
for assistance under the PMRY.
21.3.6 Eligible Activities
Assistance will be provided for all economically viable activities including agricultural and
allied activities but excluding direct agricultural operations like raising crop, purchase of
manure, etc. The implementing agencies will decide the eligibility and classification of the
activity proposed to be financed under industry/service/business sectors. Earlier stipulations
on ceilings on the activities to be covered under the Industry, Service and Business sectors
since stand withdrawn.
Relaxations of PMRY norms for North-East Region, Himachal Pradesh, Uttaranchal and
Jammu & Kashmir have been provided. Government of India has decided to provide certain
relaxations on the various parameters in the implementation of PMRY in the States of North-
Eastern Region, viz., Assam, Mizoram, Manipur, Tripura, Nagaland, Arunachal Pradesh,
Meghalaya and Sikkim as well as Himachal Pradesh, Utlaranchal and Jammu & Kashmir.
These are:
• The PMRY is expanded to cover areas of horticulture, piggery, poultry, fishing, small
tea gardens,etc., to cover all economically viable activities.
• Family income not exceeding Rs. 1 lakh per annum for each beneficiary, along with
his/her spouse and the parents of the beneficiary.
• The upper age limit is relaxed to 40 years in general. For the SC/ST/Ex-servicemen,
physically handicapped and women, the relaxation shall be up to the age of 45 years.
198
• In the case of SHGs, the subsidy per beneficiary is Rs. 12,500 subject to a maximum
of Rs. 1.25 lakh.
• Banks will be allowed to take margin money from the borrower varying from 5 per
cent to 12.5 per cent of the project cost so as to make the total of subsidy and margin money
equal to 20 per cent of the project cost. (Applicable to cases sanctioned from 1 April, 1999).
21.3.7 Project Funding Components of Project Cost
The project cost for the business services sector will be restricted to Rs. 2 lakh and 5 lakh for
the Industry sector. A borrower under the scheme will be eligible for sanction of a composite
loan (working capital + term loan) based on a project cost of up to Rs. 2 lakh for other than
business sector.
Loan amount: Banks may provide a composite loan (term loan/working capital) not
exceeding Rs. 1,90,000 per individual borrower depending upon whether the project is in the
business sector or other than the business sector respectively, after satisfying about the
viability and bankability of the project. Banks should disburse the amount inclusive of margin
money deposited by the borrowers.
The rate of interest charged for such loans are same as the rate applicable to priority sector
loans up to Rs. 2 lakh, viz., not exceeding the PLR of individual banks.
Margin
(a) Banks will be allowed to take margin money from the borrower varying from 5 per
cent to 16.25 per cent of the project cost so as to make the total of subsidy and margin money
equal to 20 per cent of the project cost. In the North Eastern States (including Sikkim),
Himachal Pradesh, Uttaranchal and Jammu & Kashmir, banks have been allowed to take
margin money from the borrower varying from 5 per cent to 12.5 per cent of the project cost
so as to make the total of subsidy and margin money equal to 20 per cent of the project cost.
(b) The margin money deposited by the borrower is not retainable as a security for the
advance.
Subsidy Amount
Subsidy eligible is 15 per cent of the project cost, subject to a ceiling of Rs. 12,500 per
borrower in States other than North Eastern States, Uttaranchal, Himachal and J&K. In case
the amount disbursed is less than the original project cost, the subsidy eligibility will be
restricted to 15 per cent of the revised project cost. In the case of Dairy loans, where the
disbursement will be made in two stages (second batch of animals after six months), the
branches may be advised to claim the subsidy from the head office only at the time of the
final (second) disbursement of the loan.
Security
Apart from the margin and the personal guarantee provided by the borrower as also the
subsidy by the Government, the borrower will have to hypothecate/mortgage/pledge to the
bank assets, created out of the bank loan. If no fixed assets are proposed to be created in case
of loans exceeding Rs. 50,000, banks should exercise special care while sanctioning such
cases. Borrowers will not be required to give a collateral security under the industry sector
projects with the cost up to Rs. 2 lakh and up to Rs. 1 lakh for business and service sectors.
In case of a partnership, the exemption from collateral is limited to Rs. 1 lakh per person,
participating in the project. The exemption limit in respect of a partnership project in the
industries sector for obtaining of collateral security will be Rs. 5 lakh per borrowal account in
the tiny sector. Even where offered, such collateral security or guarantee is not accepted.
199
Repayment Schedule
Repayment schedule may be fixed in the range of 3 to 7 years after an initial moratorium, as
may be prescribed by the financing bank, The repayment schedule is to be worked out only
for the term loan component.
Additional Finance
Additional finance towards working capital may be provided to the extent that the term loan
component and working capital sanctioned should not exceed the prescribed ceiling amount
fixed for the borrower (i.e. Rs. 1 lakh or Rs. 2 lakh depending upon whether the loan is for
the business sector or for other than the business sector) or for all the partners collectively
and proposal for additional finance should also be approved by the task force committee.
Penal Interest/Processing Charges
No penal interest or processing charges is levied on loans granted under the PMRY scheme.
Subsidy Management
Subsidy disbursal: The subsidy is made available by Government of India in advance and
passed on to the banks through Reserve Bank of India. The subsidy portion will be kept as a
fixed deposit with the banks in the name of the borrower for the duration of the term loan
component but will not earn any interest. The subsidy deposit will be available to the
borrower for adjustment against the last instalment(s) due under the term loan component. In
any case, the fixed deposit should run for a minimum period of 3 years and would be
available for adjustment only thereafter.
Effective Date of FDR
As the subsidy amount is remitted in advance to the head office of the bank, the date of the
fixed deposit created out of the subsidy amount will be the date on which the last instalment
of the loan is disbursed by the branch. From that date, no interest will be charged on the
subsidy portion of the loan. Even if the subsidy amount is received by the head office after
the loan is disbursed, to avoid inconvenience to the borrowers, the FD shall run from the date
on which the last of instalment of the loan was disbursed and no interest on the subsidy
portion of the loan shall be charged from that date.
Non-Payment of Interest on FDR Representing Subsidy
On the subsidy amount retained by the banks as a fixed deposit, in the name of the
beneficiary, no interest is paid by the bank. On the portion of the loan, representing the
subsidy, no interest would be charged by banks. The rate of interest to be charged will be
decided, based of the loan amount net of subsidy.
21.3.8 Joint Ventures/Partnerships
Group activity stands a better chance of success because it is easier to provide back up
support and marketing linkages. Group activities are, therefore, encouraged.
If more than one applicants join together and form partnership concern, they will be eligible
for a total loan and subsidy, subject to the condition that proportionate loan/subsidy to each
borrower does not exceed the prescribed ceiling per individual borrower and the total project
cost should not exceed Rs. 10 lakh. Also, the individual ceiling on the share of the project
cost for each one of the partners will be dependent on the nature of the activity undertaken by
the firm. It would be preferable if the shares of partners were equal. All the partners should be
prima facie eligible for assistance under PMRY scheme.
200
21.3.9 Financing for SHGs under PMRY
Self-help groups (SHG) could be considered for financing under the PMRY provided:
(a) Educated unemployed youth, satisfying the eligibility criteria as laid down under the
scheme,volunteer to form a SHG to set up self-employed ventures (Common Economic
Activity).
(b) Self-help group may consist of 5-20 educated unemployed youth.
(c) No upper ceiling on loan.
(d) Loan may be provided as per individual eligibility taking into account the requirement
of the project.
(e) SHG may undertake a common economic activity for which a loan is sanctioned
without resorting to onward lending to its members.
(f) Subsidy may be provided to the SHG as per the eligibility of individual members
taking into account relaxation provided in North-Eastern States, Uttaranchal, Himachal
Pradesh and Jammu & Kashmir.
(g) Required margin money contribution (i.e. subsidy and margin to be equal to 20 per
cent of the project cost) should be brought in by the SHG collectively.
(h) The exemption limit for obtaining collateral security will be Rs. 5 lakh per borrowal
account for projects under the industry sector. Exemption from collateral will be limited to an
amount of Rs. 1 lakh per member of SHG for projects under service and business sectors.
Banks may consider an enhancement in the limit of exemption of collateral in deserving
cases.
21.3.10 Other Aspects: Deceased Borrowers
In the case of the death of a borrower under PMRY, it would be in order for banks to transfer
the liability to the legal heir/near relative of the deceased or any third party willing to take the
liabilities and continue to run the unit/activity, even if they do not satisfy the criteria
stipulated under the scheme, provided the person to whom the unit/activity is thus transferred,
without changing in any way the terms of the loan, satisfies the lending bank regarding the
timely repayment of the loan instalments.
The subsidy amount will also accrue only to the transferred account. If, however, an
arrangement of this type is not feasible, banks may take steps to recover the loan and adjust
the subsidy amount towards the dues of the deceased beneficiary. -
Recovery
Banks have been permitted to file criminal complaints against those borrowers who
misuse/divert the loans sanctioned under PMRY.
Banks are sometimes facing difficulties in the recovery of their loans availed by unmarried
girls after marriage due to their migrating to a new place. It has now been decided that banks
may include the parents/heads of the family of the unmarried girls as a co-borrower of the
PMRY loan.
Refinance
Banks would be eligible to avail of the refinance under the Small Industries Development
Bank of India (SIDBI) or NABARD schemes, to the extent that these are available for the
purpose specified.
21.4 SCHEME OF LIBERATION AND REHABILITATION OF SCAVENGERS (SLRS)
The Government of India has launched on 22 March, 1992 a National scheme for the
rehabilitation of scavengers and their dependents (SLRS).
21.4.1 The Scheme
The objective of the scheme is to liberate scavengers and their dependents from their existing
hereditary
201
and obnoxious occupation of manually removing night soil and filth and to provide for and
engage them in alternative and dignified occupations within a period of five years.
A scavenger is one who is partially or wholly engaged in the obnoxious and inhuman
occupation of manually removing night soil and filth. The dependent of a scavenger is one
who is a member of his/her family or is dependent on him/her irrespective of the fact whether
he is partially or wholly engaged in the said occupation.
The scheme would cover primarily all scavengers belonging to the scheduled caste
community and scavengers belonging to other communities engaged in servicing specifically
dry latrines, to eliminate the practice of manual scavenging. Persons engaged in cleaning
occupations, other than dry latrines, are not eligible for assistance under the scheme.
21.4.2 Salient Features
The National SLRS is applicable to public sector banks. The scheme would cover scavengers
in urban areas, semi-urban areas, rural areas, any other town or area including cantonment
boards, colonies set up by public sector undertakings, etc., where manual scavenging
prevails. The unit for assistance under the scheme is not the family but each scavenger and
each dependent of the scavengers.
For the purpose of training in various trades the age limit is 18 to 50 years. No minimum
qualification is prescribed for providing training to scavengers. Loans granted by banks to the
scavengers under the scheme will be eligible for a classification under priority sector and
loans up to Rs. 6,500 as loans under the DRI scheme.
21.4.3 Funding
The scheme provides for funding of projects costing up to Rs. 50,000 per beneficiary and also
for margin money to the extent of 15 per cent of the project cost at 4 per cent rate of interest.
For projects costing Rs. 50,000 the break up would be Rs. 10,000 subsidy, Rs. 7,500 margin
money from State Scheduled Caste Development Corporations (SCDC) and Rs. 32,500 loan
from the banks. Under the scheme, subsidy would be 50 per cent of the project cost with a
ceiling of Rs. 10,000.
Loans up to Rs. 6,500 are treated as loans under DRI Scheme and concessional rate of
interest at 4 per cent is extended notwithstanding the fact that the project cost may exceed Rs.
6,500. Where the loan sanctioned/disbursed is more than Rs. 6,500 such loans will attract a
rate of interest according to the RBI directive on interest.
21.4.4 Eligibility
An applicant may be considered for assistance, even if he/she had been assisted earlier under
any subsidy-linked scheme if the applicant is otherwise eligible. However, an existing
defaulter applicant will not be eligible for assistance. A member of family being a defaulter
need not be a bar for considering the application of another member of the family for
assistance.
21.4.5 Security
The security for the loan will be only the hypothecation of assets created out of the
loan/subsidy in favour of the banks. The SCDC allows having a second/parri passu charge
over the assets to cover their margin money loan assistance.
21.4.6 Repayment
The repayment of loans will be in monthly/quarterly instalments within three to seven years,
inclusive of the grace period not exceeding six months. The recovery is first appropriated
towards the recovery
202
21.4.7 Other Aspects
The banks should not insist on a deposit amount in the fixed deposit, from the beneficiary.
All loan applications up to a credit limit of Rs. 25,000 should be disposed of within a
fortnight and those for over Rs. 25,000 within 8-9 weeks.
21.5 LET US SUM UP
The various Government sponsored schemes are aimed at helping the poor to come above the
poverty line, with the help of a loan and subsidy assistance. The SGSY is the major scheme
announced by the Government of India towards alleviation of poverty. The PMRY aims at
providing employment to the educated unemployed.
21.6 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS
1. 'Swarnajayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana' (SGSY) did not replace one of the following
schemes:
(a) Integrated Rural Development Programme (IRDP)
(b) Training of Rural Youth for Self-Employment (TRYSEM)
(c) Development of Women and Children in Rural Areas (DWCRA)
(d) PMRY
2. Under SGSY, the group is entitled for a subsidy of
(a) Fifty per cent of the project cost subject to per capita subsidy of Rs. 10,000/subject to
maximum of Rs. 1.50 lakh.
(b) Twenty-five per cent of the project cost subject to per capita subsidy of Rs. 10,000
subject to maximum of Rs. 1.25 lakh.
(c) Thirty-three per cent of the project cost subject to per capita subsidy of Rs. 10,000
subject to maximum of Rs. 1.50 lakh.
(d) Fifty per cent of the project cost subject to per capita subsidy of Rs. 10,000 subject to
maximum ofRs. 1.25 lakh.
3. Under SJSRY, the percentage of women beneficiaries should not be less than
(a) 30 per cent(b) 33 per cent
(c) 50 per cent(d) 22.5 per cent
4. Under PMRY, the maximum age limit for availing loan by physically handicapped
persons is
(a) 28 (b) 35
(c) 40 (d) 45
21.7 ANSWERS TO 'CHECK YOUR PROGRESS'
1. (d), 2. (d), 3. (a), 4. (d).
21.8 KEYWORDS
Swarnajayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana, Swarnajayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana, Prime
Minister's Rozgar Yojana, Urban Poor, Rural Poor, Activity Clusters, NGO, SHG, Skill
Upgradation, Subsidy, DRDA, Swarozgaris, Wilful Defaulter, Below Poverty Line (BPL),
Project Funding, Target Group, Loan Component, Margin Component, Income Criteria,
Urban Local Body (ULB).
SELF HELP GROUPS
STRUCTURE
22.0 Objectives
22.1 SHG - Definition
22.2 Need for SHGs
22.3 Functions of SHGs
22.4 Other Conditions of Indirect Finance to SHGs through NGOs
22.5 Self-Help Groups and SGSY Scheme
22.6 Capacity Building of the Self-Help Groups
22.7 Let Us Sum Up
22.8 Check Your Progress
22.9 Answers to 'Check Your Progress'
22.10 Keywords
204
22.0 OBJECTIVES
This unit will help you to understand the concept of Self-Help Groups (SHGs), a vehicle
through which the concept of micro-finance is carried to the unreached and under reached
sections of the rural poor.
22.1 SHG - DEFINITION
Self-Help Group is a silent revolutionary concept that is taking place in the credit delivery
system. Micro-finance through SHGs offers best form of credit for reaching the unreached
and the under reached. The SHG concept has gained momentum due to active participation of
banks.
'Self-Help Group is a voluntary association of poor formed with the common goal of social
and economic empowerment.'
The members volunteered to organise themselves into a group for the eradication of poverty
of the members. They agree to save regularly and convert their savings into a common fund
known as the group corpus. The members of the group agree to use this common fund and
such other funds that they may receive as a group through a common management.
22.2 NEED FOR SHGs
The rural poor is incapacitated due to various reasons, such as; most of them are socially
backward, illiterate, with low motivation and a poor economic base. Individually, a poor is
not only weak in a socio-economic term but also lacks access to the knowledge and
information, which are the most important components of today's development process.
However, in a group, they are empowered to overcome many of these weaknesses. Hence,
there are needs for SHGs, which in specific terms are as under:
(a) To mobilise the resources of the individual members for their collective economic
development
(b) To uplift the living conditions of the poor
(c) To create a habit of savings
(d) Utilisation of local resources
(e) To mobilise individual skills for group's interest
(f) To create awareness about rights
(g) To assist the members financially at the time of need
(h) Entrepreneurship development
(i) To identify problems, analysing and finding solutions in the group
(j) To act as a media for socio-economic development of the village
(k) To develop linkages with institutions of NGOs
(1) To organise training for skill development
(rn) To help in the recovery of loans
(n) To gain mutual understanding, develop trust and self-confidence
(o) To build-up teamwork
(p) To develop leadership qualities
The group formation will keep in view the following broad guidelines:
Normally, the number of members in a group should not exceed twenty; otherwise,
registration becomes compulsory, Generally, a self-help group may consist of ten to twenty
persons. However, in difficult areas like deserts, hills and areas with scattered and sparse
population and in case of economically weaker and/or physically disabled persons, this
number may be from five to twenty. Generally, all members of the group should belong to
families below the poverty line. However, if necessary, a
205
maximum of twenty per cent and in exceptional cases, where essentially required,
up to a maximum of thirty per cent of the members in a group may be taken from families
marginally above the poverty line living contiguously with BPL (Below Poverty Line)
families and if they are acceptable to the BPL members of the group. However, the APL
members will not be eligible for the subsidy under the scheme. The BPL families must
actively participate in the management and decision making, which should not ordinarily be
entirely in the hands of APL (Above Poverty Line) families. Further, APL members of the
Self-Help group shall not become office bearers (Group Leader, Assistant Group Leader or
Treasurer) of the group.
The group shall not consist of more than one member from the same family. A person should
not be a member of more than one group. The group should devise a code of conduct (Group
management norms) to bind itself. This should be in the form of regular meetings (weekly or
fortnightly), functioning in a democratic manner, allowing for a free exchange of views,
participation by the members in the decision making process. The group should be able to
draw up an agenda for each meeting and take up discussions as per the agenda. The members
should build their corpus through regular savings. The group should be able to collect the
minimum voluntary saving amount from all the members regularly in the group meetings.
The savings so collected will be the group corpus fund.
The group corpus fund should be used to advance loans to the members. The group should
develop financial management norms covering the loan sanction procedure, repayment
schedule and interest rates. The members in the group meetings should take all the loaning
decisions through a participatory decision making process. The group should be able to
prioritise the loan applications, fix repayment schedules, fix an appropriate rate of interest for
the loans advanced and closely monitor the repayment of the loan instalments from the
loanee.
The group should operate a group account preferably in their service area bank branch, to
deposit the balance amounts left with the groups after disbursing loans to its members. The
group should maintain simple basic records such as minutes book, attendance register, loan
ledger, general ledger, cash book, bank passbook and individual passbooks.
22.3 FUNCTIONS OF SHGs
To develop a group into well-managed self-help group, the members should evolve rules and
regulations, which are to be adopted, after discussions with all the members for compliance in
full. Some illustrative guidelines for the formulation of such rules and regulations are given
as under:
Meeting: The group should meet regularly; ideally, the meetings should be weekly or at least
monthly. (Advantage: They become closer if they meet regularly. This helps them to
understand each other's difficulties better).
Compulsory attendance: Full attendance in all the group meetings will make it easy for the
SHG to stabilise and start working to the satisfaction of all.
Membership register, minutes register, etc., are to be kept up to date by the group, by making
the entries regularly. (Advantage: This helps you to know about the SHG easily. It also helps
to build trust among the SHG members).
Fixed day for meetings: The group should have a fixed day or date for the meetings.
(Advantage: This will help the members to plan in advance their routine works).
Common place: The group should fix a common place to conduct the meetings.
Savings: Savings should be deposited by all the members in the meeting itself. No interest
will be paid to the members for their money with the group. The members will not be
encouraged to adjust their savings amount against their loan due to the group.
206
Keeping of accounts: Simple and clear books for all transactions, to be maintained. If no
member is able to maintain the books, the SHG may take outside help. All registers and
account books are written during the course of the meeting.
Resolution from the SHG: The SHG has to pass a resolution in the group meeting, signed by
all members, indicating their decision to open SB A/c with the bank. This resolution is filed
with the bank.
Authorisation from the SHG: The SHG should authorise at least three members, any two of
whom, to jointly operate upon their account. The resolution along with the filled in
application form duly introduced by the promoter may be filed with the bank branch.
Copy of the rules and regulations of the SHG: This is not necessary. If the group has not
formulated any such rules or regulations, loans are sanctioned without them. A savings bank
account passbook is issued to the SHG. This should be in the name of the SHG and not in the
name of any individual(s).
Conduct of internal lending by SHG: After saving for a minimum period of two to three
months, the common savings fund should be used by the SHG for lending to its own
members.
The purpose, terms and conditions for lending to its members, the rate of interest, etc., as
decided by the group through discussions during its meetings (RBI and NABARD have
permitted the members to decide on these aspects). The interest is usually kept as two or three
rupees per hundred rupees per month. Simple and clear books of account of savings and
lending are kept by the SHG.
22.4 OTHER CONDITIONS OF INDIRECT FINANCE TO SHGs THROUGH NGOs
(a) NGO is registered under the Society/Company/Partnership/Cooperative act
(b) Audited balance sheet for three years analysed
(c) Provision in the by-laws of NGO to borrow for SHG activities
(d) Resolution to borrow from bank
(e) A statement of credit required by SHGs
Self-Help Groups (SHGs) are considered for assistance under PMRY provided:
• Educated unemployed youth satisfying the eligibility criteria as laid down under the
scheme, volunteer to form SHG to set up self-employed ventures (Common Economic
Activity).
• A Self-Help Group may consist of 5 to 20 educated unemployed youth.
• No upper ceiling on loan.
• Loans provided as per individual eligibility, taking into account the requirement of the
project.
• SHG may undertake a common economic activity for which a loan is sanctioned
without resorting to onward lending to its members.
• Subsidy is provided to the SHG as per the eligibility of the individual members,
taking into account the relaxation provided in North Eastern States, Uttarakhand, Himachal
Pradesh and Jammu & Kashmir.
• Required margin money contribution (i.e. subsidy and margin to be equal to twenty
per cent of the project cost) should be brought in by the SHG collectively.
• The exemption limit for obtaining collateral security will be Rs. 5 lakh per borrowing
account for projects under the Industry Sector. Exemption from collateral will be limited to
an amount of Rs. 1 lakh per member of SHG for projects under service and business sectors.
Enhancement in limit of exemption of collateral; may be considered in deserving cases.
• Implementing agencies may decide the necessity of pre-disbursal training for all the
members/ majority of the members in the group.
207
22.5 SELF-HELP GROUPS AND SGSY SCHEME
The SGYS scheme has come into operation from 1 April, 1999 replacing all other schemes
like the IRDP, TRYSEM, DWCRA, SITRA, GKJ, MWS, etc. The objective of the scheme is
to bring the poor people above the poverty line within three years. For this purpose, an
emphasis has been laid on group financing and group activities, taking into account the
natural resources available in the area and the activities suitable to that area. The scheme
envisages supplementary doses of credit if necessary to the participants. Preference will be
given to well functioning SHGs in the villages both under the group finance and individual
finance.
22.6 CAPACITY BUILDING OF THE SELF-HELP GROUPS
SHGs that are in existence for about six months and have demonstrated the potential of a
viable group enters the stage, wherein it receives the revolving fund of Rs. 25,000 from the
bank as a cash credit facility and also embarks on further capacity building of its entire team.
DRDAs will arrange to provide the revolving fund to such groups, meeting their share from
out of the SGSY fund. Of this, a sum of Rs. 10,000 is given to the bank by the DRDA. Banks
may charge interest only on the sum exceeding Rs. 10,000. The subsidy of Rs. 10,000
released by DRDA is adjusted against the loan at the end of cash credit period on the request
of the group.
22.7 LET US SUM UP
SHG is an unregistered group of less than twenty people; otherwise registration is
compulsory, from a homogeneous class who come together for addressing their common
problems, both economic and community problems. They are encouraged to make voluntary
savings on a regular basis. They use these savings to make interest-bearing loans to their
members. In the process, the essentials of financial intermediation including prioritisation of
needs, setting terms and conditions and keeping financial accounts are imbibed in them. The
group, which has learnt this basic process of savings money, lending and recovering it back,
are ready to be linked to the bank, thereby having access to the larger resources of the bank.
The peer pressure among the group ensures timely repayment. The concept is well received in
the developing and the under developed countries, as evidenced by the recognition the father
of the SHG Movement, Mr. Mohammed Yunus of Bangla Desh received by Nobel Award.
The salient features of the SHG Movement are:
(a) Groups of homogeneous people from similar economic background living in the
neighbourhood.
(b) Focus on women.
(c) Saving first, credit later.
(d) Credit prioritised among the members, which builds pressure for timely repayment.
(e) Transparent operation, as decisions are taken collectively in meetings.
22.8 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS
1. Maintenance of the following books, registers is not compulsory for SHG
(a) Minutes book (b) Savings and Loan register
(c) Visitors book (d) Members' passbook
2. SHGs, for assistance under PMRY may consist of
(a) 5-20 educated unemployed youth (b) 3-15 educated unemployed youth
(c) 10-25 educated unemployed youth (d) 2-10 educated unemployed youth
208
22.9 ANSWERS TO 'CHECK YOUR PROGRESS'
1. (c), 2. (a).
22.10 KEYWORDS
Self-Help Group, Joint Liability Group, Linkage, Capacity building, Micro-finance, Thrift,
Entrepre-neurship Development, Team Work, Skill Development, Below Poverty Line (BPL),
DRDA.
CREDIT CARDS, HOME LOANS, PERSONAL LOANS, CONSUMER LOANS
STRUCTURE
23.0 Objectives
23.1 Credit Card
23.1.1 Introduction
23.1.2 Benefits to Credit Card Holders
23.1.3 Disadvantages to Credit Card Holders
23.1.4 Guidelines on Credit Card Operations of Banks
23.2 Home Loans
23.2.1 Introduction
23.2.2 The Procedure and Practices for Home Loans
23.2.3 Documents Required
23.3 Personal Loans
23.3.1 Introduction
23.3.2 Procedure and Practices for Salary Loans
23.3.3 Other Aspects
23.4 Consumer Loans
23.4.1 Procedure and Practices for Consumer Loans
23.5 Let Us Sum Up
23.6 Check Your Progress
23.7 Answers to 'Check Your Progress'
23.8 Keywords
210
23.0 OBJECTIVES
By reading this unit, the learner will be able to know about credit cards and the guidelines of
the regulatory authority on matters pertaining to credit card, procedures and practices on
home loan, personal loan and consumer loan.
23.1 CREDIT CARD
23.1.1 Introduction
Credit card is the one of the delivery channels of the banking services. Due to the
advancement of technology and easy accessibility to credit, the credit cards are gaining
popularity nowadays. It is a novel way of providing value added services to banks' customers.
Cards are issued to approved clients for purchase of goods or services from authorised
merchant establishments on the credit guarantee of issuer of credit card.
23.1.2 Benefits to Credit Card Holders
(a) They can purchase goods and services at a large number of merchant outlets up to the
inbuilt ceiling credit limit amount without using cash or cheque. This is generally useful in
emergencies.
(b) Card holder has a period of interest free credit, depending upon the issuing bank and
the card scheme, i.e. the normal card and gold cards, as offered by various banks. The period
of interest free credit ranges from 15 days to 51 days.
(c) Cash up to a ceiling, within the credit limit is obtainable from the banks' branches or
ATMs (Automated Teller Machines).
23.1.3 Disadvantages to Credit Card Holders
(a) Often results in over spending.
(b) Frauds, due to a loss of card in the intervening periods.
(c) Since signatures are already on the cards, forged signatures could cause a loss to the
card holders. Such kind of a forged signature loss is avoided with the use of photo credit
cards (Credit cards with the photograph of the User).
23.1.4 Guidelines on Credit Card Operations of Banks
The Reserve Bank of India had constituted a working group on regulatory mechanism for
cards. The group has suggested various regulatory measures aimed at encouraging growth of
credit cards in a safe, secure and efficient manner as well as to ensure that the rules,
regulations, standards and practices of the card issuing banks are in alignment with the best
customer practices. Each bank/NBFC must have a well-documented policy and a 'Fair
Practices Code' for credit card operations. In March 2005, the IBA released a 'Fair Practices
Code' for credit card operations which could be adopted by the banks/ NBFCs. The following
are the guidelines issued by Reserve Bank of India on various aspects of the credit card
operations by banks:
Issue of Cards
(a) Banks/NBFCs should independently assess the credit risk, while issuing cards to
persons, especially
to students and others with no independent financial means. Add-on cards, i.e. those that are
subsidiary to the principal card, are issued with the clear understanding that the liability will
be that of the principal cardholder.
(b) As holding several credit cards enhances the total credit available to any consumer,
banks/NBFCs should assess the credit limit for a credit card customer having regard to the
limits enjoyed by the cardholder from other banks based on self-declaration/credit
information.
211
The card issuing banks/NBFCs would be solely responsible for fulfilment of all KYC
requirements, even where agents solicit business on their behalf.
© While issuing cards, the terms and conditions for issue and usage of a credit card is
mentioned in a clear and simple language (preferably in English, Hindi and the local
language) easily comprehensible to a card user.
Interest Rates and Other Charges
(a) Card issuers should ensure that there is no delay in dispatching bills and the customer
has sufficient number of days (at least one fortnight) for making payments before the interest
starts getting charged.
(b) Card issuers should quote annualised percentage rates (APR) on card products
(separately for retail purchase and for cash advance, if different). The method of calculation
of APR is given with a couple of examples for better comprehension. The APR charged and
the annual fee is shown with equal prominence. The late payment charges, including the
method of calculation of such charges and the number of days, are to be prominently
indicated. The manner in which the outstanding unpaid amount will be included for
calculation of interest should also be specifically shown with prominence in all monthly
statements. Even where the minimum amount indicated to keep the card valid has been paid,
it should be indicated in bold letters that the interest will be charged on the amount due, after
the due date of payment. These aspects may be shown in the 'Welcome Kit' in addition to
being shown in the monthly statement.
(c) The bank/NBFC should not levy any charge that was not explicitly indicated to the
credit card holder at the time of issuance of the card and getting his/her consent. However,
this would not be applicable to charges like service taxes, etc., which may subsequently be
levied by the Government or any other statutory authority.
(d) The terms and conditions for payment of credit card dues, including the minimum
payment due, should be stipulated, so as to ensure that there is no negative amortisation.
(e) Changes in charges (other than interest) may be made only with prospective effect,
giving notice of at least one month. If a credit card holder desires to surrender his credit card
on account of any change in the credit card charges to his disadvantage, he may be permitted
to do so, without the bank levying any extra charge for such a closure.
Wrongful Billing
(a)The card issuing bank/NBFC should ensure that wrong bills are not raised and issued to
customers. In case, a customer protests any bill, the bank/NBFC should provide an
explanation, and if necessary, documentary evidence to the customer, within a maximum
period of sixty days with a spirit to amicably redress the grievances.
(b) To obviate frequent complaints of delayed billing, the credit card issuing bank/NBFC may
consider providing the bills and statements of accounts online, with suitable security.
Protection of Customer Rights
Customer's rights, in relation to credit card operations, primarily relate to personal privacy, a
clarity relating to rights and obligations, preservation of customer records, maintenance of
confidentiality of customer information and fair practices in debt collection. The card issuing
bank/NBFC would be responsible as the principal, for all acts of omission or commission of
their agents (DSAs/DMAs and recovery agents).
(i) Right to privacy
(a) Unsolicited cards should not be issued. In case, an unsolicited card is issued and activated
without the consent of the recipient and the latter is billed for the same, the card issuing bank/
NBFC shall not only reverse the charges forthwith, but also pay a penalty without demur to
212
(b) Unsolicited loans or other credit facilities should not be offered to the credit card
customers.
In case, an unsolicited credit facility is extended without the consent of the recipient and the
latter objects to the same/the credit sanctioning bank/NBFC shall not only withdraw the
credit limit, but also be liable to pay such penalty as may be considered appropriate.
(c) The card issuing bank/NBFC should not unilaterally upgrade credit cards and enhance
credit
limits. Prior consent of the borrower should invariably be taken whenever there are any
change(s) in the terms and conditions.
(d) The card issuing bank/NBFC should maintain a 'Do Not Call Registry' (DNCR)
containing
the phone numbers (both cell phones and land phones) of customers as well as non customers
(non constituents), who have informed the bank/NBFC that they do not wish to receive
unsolicited calls/SMS for marketing of its credit card products.
(e) The intimation for including an individual's telephone number in the DNCR should be
facilitated through a website maintained by the bank/NBFC or on the basis of a letter
received
from such a person addressed to the bank/NBFC.
(f) The card issuing bank/NBFC should introduce a system whereby the DSAs/ DMAs as
well as its call centres have to first submit to the bank/NBFC a list of numbers they intend to
call for marketing purposes. The bank/NBFC should then refer to the DNCR and only those
numbers which do not figure in the DNCR should be cleared for calling.
(g) The numbers cleared by the card issuing bank/NBFC for calling should only be
accessed. The bank/NBFC would be held responsible if a DNCN is called on by its
DSAs/DMAs or call centre.
(h) The card issuing bank/NBFC should ensure that the DNCR numbers are not passed on to
any unauthorised person/s or misused in any manner, (i) Banks/NBFCs/their agents should
not resort to an invasion of privacy, viz., persistently bothering the card holders at odd hours,
violation of "do not call" code, etc. (ii) Customer confidentiality
(a) The card issuing bank/NBFC should not reveal any information relating to customers
obtained
at the time of opening the account or issuing the credit card; to any other person or
organisation,
without obtaining the specific consent of the customer, as regards the purpose(s) for which
the information will be used and the organisations with whom the information will be shared.
(b) The disclosure to the DSAs/recovery agents should also be limited to the extent that
will
enable them to discharge their duties. Personal information provided by the card holder but
not required for recovery purposes should not be released by the card issuing bank/NBFC.
The card issuing bank/NBFC should ensure that the DSAs/DMAs do not transfer or misuse
any customer information during marketing of credit card products.
(iii) Fair practices in debt collection
(a) In the matter of recovery of dues, banks/NBFCs may ensure that they, as also their
agents,
adhere to the extant instructions of the RBI as also IBA's code for collection of dues and
repossession of security. In case, the bank/NBFCs have their own code for collection of dues,
it should, at the minimum, incorporate all the terms of IBA's code.
(b) In particular, with regard to the appointment of third party agencies for debt
collection, it is
essential that such agents refrain from any action that could damage the integrity and
reputation
of the bank/NBFC and that they observe strict customer confidentiality. All letters issued by
recovery agents must contain the name and address of a responsible senior officer of the card
issuing bank whom the customer can contact at his location.
(c) Banks/NBFCs/their agents should not resort to intimidation or harassment of any
kind, either verbal or physical, against any person in their debt collection efforts, including
acts intended
213
to humiliate publicly or intrude the privacy of the credit card holders' family members,
referees and friends, making threatening and anonymous calls or making false and misleading
representations.
Redressal of Grievances
(a) Generally, a time limit of sixty (60) days may be given to the customers for preferring
their complaints/grievances.
(b) The card issuing bank/NBFC should constitute 'Grievance Redressal' machinery
within the bank/ NBFC and give wide publicity about it through electronic and print media.
The name and contact number of the designated grievance redressal officer of the
bank/NBFC should be mentioned on the credit card bills. The designated officer should
ensure that genuine grievances of credit card subscribers are redressed promptly.
(c) The grievance redressal procedure of the bank/NBFC and the time frame fixed for
responding to the complaints should be placed on the bank/NBFC's website. The name,
designation, address and contact number of important executives as well as that of the
grievance redressal officer of the bank/NBFC may be displayed on the website. There should
be a system of acknowledging customers' complaints for follow-up, such as complaint
number/docket number, even if the complaints are
received on phone.
(d) If a complainant does not get a satisfactory response from the bank/NBFC within a
maximum period of thirty (30) days from the date of his lodging the complaint, there should
be a provision to escalate the complaint to the next higher authority in the bank/NBFC.
Internal Control and Monitoring Systems
With a view to ensuring that the quality of customer service is ensured on an ongoing basis in
banks/ NBFCs, the 'Standing Committee' on customer service in each bank/NBFC may
review on a monthly basis the credit card operations including reports of defaulters to the
CIBIL, credit card related complaints and take measures to improve the services and ensure
the orderly growth in the credit card operations. Banks/NBFCs should put up a detailed
quarterly analysis of credit card related complaints to their top management. Card issuing
banks should have in place, a suitable monitoring mechanism to randomly check the
genuineness of merchant transactions.
Right to Impose Penalty
The Reserve Bank of India reserves the right to impose any penalty on a bank/NBFC under
the provisions of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 for violation of any of these guidelines.
23.2 HOME LOANS
23.2.1 Introduction
Banks accept deposits from the public and as in return, it pays interest to the depositors. After
accepting deposits, the bank cannot keep the money idle. It has to deploy it in a profitable
manner so that it can earn a profit. Loans and advances are the main source of deployment for
the bankers.
Banks have formulated several loan schemes, so as to meet the needs of the different
segments of the society. The popular loans schemes are Home Loans, Vehicle Loans,
Consumer Loans, Loan to Pensioners, Loan against gold ornaments, Loan against NSC, LIP,
Educational Loan, etc. The home loan is the predominant loan in the present context. Most of
the banks are offering these loans at competitive terms. Home loans are available to resident
Indians and NRIs for the purchase or construction of house or flats, repairs and renovation of
house. Certain hanks are givine loans for purchase of house
214
23.2.2 The Procedure and Practices for Home Loans
Target Group: Normally, the target group is the salaried class, professionals, self-employed
and business¬men. Banks fix the age criteria for availing the loan.
Purpose: The purpose of the loan is for the purchase or construction of house or flats, repairs
and renovation of house, and in some banks, for purchase of house sites also.
Quantum of loan: The quantum of eligible loan is fixed based on the gross monthly
income/net monthly income. For this, banks ask for a salary certificate for the salaried class
or the Income tax return for others. Bank also ask for the statement of bank account for a
prescribed period.
Age: Banks fix the lower and upper age for availing the loan taking in to consideration the
remaining period of service, in the case of salaried class and the income earning capacity
during the period of loan for others.
Repayment: Most of the banks are giving long repayment period, say 20-25 years. The
repayment will be based on equated monthly instalments (EMI). In case of loan for purchase
of a ready built house, it should be ensured that the remaining life of the building should be
longer than the repayment period allowed, plus a cushion period, says ten years.
Normally banks allow a holiday period for repayment. The holiday period for construction
will be more than it is, for the purchase of ready built house.
Security: Generally, the property purchased or constructed out of the bank loan is taken by
way of mortgage. Sometimes, when the income of the spouse is taken for arriving at the
quantum of loan, his/ her guarantee is also taken as personal security.
Margin: Banks stipulate that a certain percentage of the project cost, say fifteen per cent, is to
be borne by the borrower from his own sources. When the loan is for repairs/renovation,
banks stipulate a higher margin.
Rate of Interest: When compared to the rate of interest for other loans, the rate of interest for
home loan is cheaper. Most of the banks offer a rate of interest below the 'Bench Mark Prime
Lending Rate' (BPLR). Banks also offer a floating rate and a fixed rate option to the
borrower. Under the floating rate, whenever there is a change in the BPLR or in 'Tenor
Premium' (TP), the home loan interest rate also changes. However, in case of fixed rate, the
rate of interest through out the period of loan will be constant. As the banks are running a risk
of loss of interest in this case whenever there is upward revision of BPLR/TP, a small amount
of additional rate is loaded over and above the floating rate. Some banks give an option to
those who have opted for the fixed rate of interest optees, to switch in to a floating rate after a
certain period, either with or without penalty. If the EMI is not paid on the due date, penal
interest, normally at two per cent, will be charged.
23.2.3 Documents Required
At the time of applying for the loan, the banks ask for some necessary documents namely;
(a) Agreement of Sale/Sale deed
(b) No Encumbrance certificate NIL EC (for 13 years)
(c) Parent document for 30 years
(d) Approved building plan
(e) Patta (NOC from Housing Board, etc., wherever applicable)
(f) Valuation report from the Bank's approved engineer
(g) Bank statement for last 12 months
215
(h) Salary Certificate for self and spouse (if spouse income is also taken into account for
arriving at the eligibility) and as proof of employment. (i) IT Returns for 3 years in case of
professionals/businessmen/self-employed persons.
While processing the home loan application, the bank will take into consideration the opinion
given by bank's panel advocate and the valuation report/project cost report of bank's panel
engineer. Normally, banks levy a certain percentage of the loan amount, say one per cent, as a
processing fee. After sanctioning of the loan, banks take the necessary loan document such as
DPN, home loan agreement, etc., from the borrower and a guarantee agreement from the
guarantor, if any. The building financed has to have an insurance policy against the risk of
fire, earthquake, floods, etc. These days, banks are insisting on the insurance on the life of the
borrower so as to cover the loan amount by paying a one time premium.
23.3 PERSONAL LOANS
23.3.1 Introduction
Generally, banks give a loan against some security, so that it can fall back on it in case of a
default. However, sometimes loans are given against personal security without any tangible
security. Examples are salary loan, loan to pensioners, loan to professionals, etc. Most of the
banks give loans to the salaried class as the source of income is regular.
23.3.2 Procedure and Practices for Salary Loans
Target group: Permanent employees with a minimum service/experience of say three years,
with a Govt./quasi Govt./boards/endowments/reputed companies/corporate industrial
establishments, etc. The stipulation of minimum period of service may vary from bank to
bank.
Purpose: For meeting of marriage/educational and medical expenses, to celebrate family
functions and for other household expenses.
Eligible Amount: The eligible amount of a loan is calculated based on so many times of the
gross/net salary. While arriving at the quantum of loan, the minimum take home pay say,
forty per cent of the gross salary, will be stipulated after the proposed EMI. Some banks
consider a greater amount of the loan, if the employer gives an undertaking to the bank to
recover the EMI from the salary and remit it into the bank. In addition, when the salary
credited with an account, maintained with the branch, banks normally consider a larger
quantum of loan.
Security: Sometimes banks insist on the guarantee of another person, if there is no collateral
security, or in case, the account is with the branch, a letter giving an undertaking from the
borrower to debit his account for the EMI. When the employer of the borrower sponsors the
loan, h is asked for an undertaking, to the bank to recover the EMI from the salary and remit
into the bank.
Documents: Proof of employment and salary certificate are normally obtained. After sanction
of the loan, banks take the necessary loan documents such as; DPN, salary loan agreement,
etc., from the borrower and a guarantee agreement from the guarantor, if any.
23.3.3 Other Aspects
The rate of interest on this loan will be higher than other loans as there is no collateral
security.
Some banks are taking post-dated cheques for the future EMI.
Banks allow 36-60 months as repayment period.
• Normally banks levy a certain percentage of the loan amount; say one per cent, as a
processing fee.
216
23.4 CONSUMER LOANS
Another major category of loans considered by the banks is the consumer loan.
23.4.1 Procedure and Practices for Consumer Loans
Target group: Salaried class, pensioners, professionals, self-employed business persons and
other individuals who have regular income.
Purpose: For purchase of consumer durables and white goods like TV, VCR, VCP, air
conditioners, refrigerators, personal computers and accessories, etc.
Eligible amount: While arriving at the quantum of loan, the cost of the article to be purchased
and the margin be brought by the borrower are taken into account. The minimum take home
pay, say forty per cent of the gross salary, shall also be ensured after the proposed EMI.
Security: Hypothecation of the article purchased out of the bank loan.
Margin: Normally a margin of 10-20 per cent is stipulated.
Repayment: Banks allow a thirty six to sixty months repayment period.
Documents: The documents to be obtained are: salary certificate for three months for self and
spouse (if spouse income is also taken into account for arriving at the eligibility) IT
returns/Form 16 for two to three years in case of professionals, businessmen, Self-employed
persons. Quotations of the articles selected from a reputed dealer. Statement of
account/passbook, showing one year's transactions. Some banks are taking post-dated
cheques for the future EMI.
After sanction of the loan, banks take necessary loan documents such as DPN, hypothecation
agreement, etc., from the borrower and a guarantee agreement from the guarantor if any.
Normally banks levy a certain percentage of the loan amount, say one per cent, as a
processing fee.
23.5 LET US SUM UP
The retail lending in banks has, of late, grown by leaps and bounds. Of retail loans extended
by banks, home loans and consumer loans form a major percentage. Apart from being a
delivery channel of the banking services, credit cards issued by banks are also a good source
of credit delivery. Due to advancement of technology and easy accessibility to credit they
provide for card users, they have gained popularity and wide acceptance in the market today.
It is, no doubt, a novel way of providing value added services to bank customers. If used
prudently, they offer a bundle of benefits to card users. To prevent the customers from falling
into a debt trap and consequent harassment from the recovery agents of the card issuers,
Reserve Bank of India has come out with a well-documented policy guidelines called "Fair
Practices Code" for banks. This apart, the customers' rights in relation to card operations are
protected. The card issuing banks/NBFCs are responsible as the principal, for all acts of
omission and commission of their collecting/recovery agents. Clear-cut grievance redressal
machinery and procedures are also put in place by banks.
With the growth in employment and the per-capita income and savings, the demand for
housing has gone up. A hassle-free approach to buying a house for a salaried employee is to
take a home loan from banks or housing finance companies. The related procedures for
raising a home loan and the practices the banks follow, while sanctioning such loans are
explained in this unit. Following the home loans, the demand for consumer loans is
increasing also corresponding to the increase in the living standards of the people. So is the
case with personal loans and the demand for credit cards. The details of the personal and
consumer loans are also provided in this Unit.
217
23.6 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS
1. One of the following statements is not true with respect to credit cards.
(a) The card issuing banks would not be responsible for fulfillment of KYC requirements,
where
agents solicit business.
(b) While issuing cards, the terms and conditions for issue and usage of a credit card
should be mentioned in clear and simple language
(c) Card issuers should quote annualized percentage rates (APR) on card products.
(d) The card issuing bank/NBFC should not unilaterally upgrade credit cards and enhance
credit limits. Prior consent of the borrower should invariably be taken whenever there are any
change(s) in terms and conditions.
2. If the guidelines of the RBI in the matter of credit are violated, it can levy penalty on
the violating bank under
(a) Reserve Bank of India Act(b) Negotiable Instrument Act
(c) Indian Penal Code (d) Banking Regulation Act
3. When banks give home loans, the nature of charge created is
(a) Hypothecation (b) Mortgage
(c) Assignment (d) Pledge
23.7 ANSWERS TO CHECK YOUR PROGRESS'
1. (a), 2. (d), 3. (b).
23.8 KEYWORDS
Credit card, Home loans, Consumer loans, Processing fee, Fixed rate of interest, Floating rate
of interest, Margin, Delivery Channel, Fair Practices Code, Merchant Establishment, KYC
Norms, Card Issuing Bank, Annualised Percentage Rate, Processing Fee, Unsolicited Card,
Do Not Call Registry (DNCR), Direct Selling Agent (DSA), Direct Marketing Agent (DMA),
Grievance Redressal Machinery, CIBIL, EMI, BPLR, Tenor Premium, Patta, Post-dated
Cheque, Fixed Rate of Interest, Floating Rate of Interest, Margin.
UNIT
24DOCUMENTATION
STRUCTURE
24.0 Objectives
24.1 Introduction
24.2 Different Types of Documents
24.3 Documentation Procedure
24.3.1 Selection of Correct Set of Documents
24.3.2 Stamping
24.3.3 Filling
24.3.4 Execution
24.3.5 Legal Formalities
24.3.6 Keeping Documents Alive
24.3.7 Safekeeping and Preservation of Documents
24.4 Stamping of Documents
24.5 Securitisation
24.6 Let Us Sum Up
24.7 Check Your Progress
24.8 Answers to 'Check Your Progress'
24.9 Keywords
220
24.0 OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit, you will be able to know and appreciate the importance of
documentation and the procedure for obtaining a proper and error free documentation.
24.1 INTRODUCTION
Documentation is one of the vital areas in the credit portfolio of a bank. The purpose of
taking documents are to fix the terms and conditions between the bankers and the borrowers,
to identify the borrowers, to identify the securities, to count the period of limitation, to resort
to legal remedies in case of need and so on. There are certain enactments such as Indian
Contract Act, Partnership Act, Companies Act, Indian Registration Act, Limitation Act,
Indian Stamps Act, etc., which affect directly the bankers' loan documentation. While taking
documents for a credit facility, the provisions of these enactments are to be kept in mind.
Non-compliance of any of the provisions of any of these enactments may affect the validity
of documents. For example, if a loan is given to a minor other than for his necessities, the
documents executed may not be enforceable in a court of law, as a contract with a minor is
void ab initio. This is as per the provisions of the Indian Contract Act.
24.2 DIFFERENT TYPES OF DOCUMENTS
The documents taken by a banker for a loan may be:
(a) Demand Promissory Notes (DPN) (b) Agreements
(c) Forms
Demand Promissory Notes: Where no specification for a fixed period for the repayment of
loan is given, the bankers take the DPN. In DPN, the borrower makes a promise to the banker
to repay the loan amount on demand with agreed rate of interest. The form of DPN should be
in conformity with Section 4 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881. The form of a DPN
varies normally to suit the situation such as fixed rate of interest, floating rate of interest,
single borrower, joint borrowers, joint and several borrowers, etc. DPN attracts a stamp duty
as per Indian Stamp Act. The rate of stamp duty on DPN is uniform through out India. As per
Section 35 of the Indian Stamp Act, if a DPN is unstamped or under-stamped, the defect
cannot be rectified even by paying a penalty. Such a DPN cannot be admissible as evidence
in a court of law. It must be ensured that the DPN is duly filled in and stamped before the
borrower signs it.
Agreements: The form of an agreement should be in conformity with the Indian Contract Act.
The terms and conditions are set out in the agreement. The amount of loan, rate of interest,
rate of penal interest, percentage of margin, period of repayment, rights of the bankers, in
case of default of loan, details of security/securities charged, are included in the agreement.
The agreements attract a stamp duty as per Indian Stamp Act. The rate of stamp duty on
agreements varies from State to State. The bankers use different forms of agreement such as
pledge agreement, hypothecation agreement, term Loan agreement, clean loan agreement,
Inter- se agreement, guarantee agreement, etc. The agreement duly filled in and stamped, is
checked before the party signs it.
Forms: Forms are not in the nature of promise or agreement. These are obtained to specify
clearly the intention of the borrower. For example, when a loan is granted against the security
of a fixed deposit standing in joint names, one of the depositors gives an authorisation to the
other to raise a loan on the deposit. Such an authorisation is taken in a form. Similarly, when
a payment is to be made out of loan proceeds to a supplier of goods, a letter from the
borrower authorising the bank to pay the proceeds by means of draft or bankers cheque, is
taken by means of a form. Such forms are used as part of documentation to prove the
intention of the borrowers.
221
24.3 DOCUMENTATION PROCEDURE
For a document to be error free and proper, the steps are to be followed are:
24.3.1 Selection of Correct Set of Documents
Documentation varies depending upon the nature of facility and type of person. The
document prescribed for a cash credit facility may not be used for a term loan facility.
Similarly, a document meant for an individual borrower can not be used for a company or
partnership borrower. As the bankers have pre¬printed forms of documents, it should be
ensured that the correct set of documents, which are relevant for the particular facility and
borrower are used.
24.3.2 Stamping
The next aspect of documentation is stamping. A document shall be stamped in accordance
with the Indian Stamp Act as amended by the concerned State Governments. Indian Stamp
Act contains provisions regarding time of stamping for instruments executed in India and out
of India. A document executed in India shall be stamped before or at the time of execution.
Section 12 of Indian Stamp Act provides for cancellation of adhesive stamp so that the same
cannot be used again. Any instrument bearing an adhesive stamp which has not been
cancelled, so that it cannot be used again, shall be deemed to be unstamped.
24.3.3 Filling
The next aspect of documentation procedure is filling. As bankers are generally using the
preprinted formats of documents with blanks in appropriate places, it is necessary to fill these
blanks as per the terms of sanction of the credit facility before execution. Once the document
is executed it becomes a concluded contract and any subsequent filling by bank without the
consent of the executant will invalidate it. The document is completed without any alteration,
overwriting or cutting. The entire document shall be filled with same ink, in same
handwriting by same person in single sitting. Otherwise, it may give rise to a suspicion that
the document is filled, subsequent to the execution.
24.3.4 Execution
After filling, the next step in the documentation procedure is the execution or signing of the
document. It should be ensured that the signature in the document tallies with the signature as
appearing in the application for the loan and also with the specimen signature, in case the
party maintains a deposit account with the bank. In case, of execution in the representative
capacity of sole proprietor or partner or director or agent or trustee or executor, etc., the
property should be clearly mentioned. Similarly, in case document is taken for a loan
sanctioned to a minor borrower for his necessity, the signature of the guardian is to be
obtained for self and as guardian of the minor borrower. Normally, bankers take the signature
of the executant in all the pages of the documents, so that he (executant) may not argue in
future, that the contents of the pages were not known to him. In case the document contains
any alteration, overwriting or cutting, it must be authenticated with the full signature of the
executant/s. The documents shall be executed in the presence of bank officials and the fact of
execution of documents with the date and time of execution, the details of documents
executed, the fact of having explaining the contents of the documents in the language known
to the executant shall be recorded in a register with the signature of two bank officials so that
in case of any dispute regarding execution of documents, this register may be produced as
evidence before appropriate authority.
24.3.5 Legal Formalities
In some cases, after execution of the document, certain legal formalities are required to be
undergone. For example, in case of advances to limited companies against its assets, the
required forms are to be
222
presented to the Registrar of Companies with the thirty days from the date of execution.
Similarly, in the case of creation of registered mortgages, the mortgage deed is presented for
registration before the Registrar of Assurances within four months from the date of execution
of the deed. If these formalities are not observed then the bank may have to loose priority
over the security. The documents may not be admissible as evidence before the competent
authority.
24.3.6 Keeping Documents Alive
The documents taken by banks for a credit facility do not have perpetual life. The provisions
of Limitation Act apply to them. The limitation Act prescribes the period of limitation for
different types of documents. For example, the period of limitation for a DPN is three years
from the date of execution. If a loan is not repaid within the period of limitation, then the
bank has to get fresh document/s for extending the period of limitation as per the provisions
of limitation Act. As per Section 18 of the Act, when the borrower acknowledges the debt
before the expiry of period of limitation, then the life of the document is extended by one
more period from the date of such acknowledgement. As per section 19 of the Act, if the
borrower or his duly authorised agent makes any part payment towards the loan before the
expiry of period of limitation, then the period of limitation is extended by one more period
from the date of such part payment.
According to Section 3 of Limitation Act, a suit cannot be filed for recovery on the strength
of a time barred document. Even the provisions regarding condonation of delay in taking
appropriate legal action as per section 5 of the Act, is not applicable for filing a suit for
recovery of debt. Hence, if the documents are time barred, the bank's right of legal remedy
for recovery is lost.
Renewal of Documents
At the time of renewal or variation within the limit the bank should obtain a fresh set of
documents or continue the existing set of documents duly supported by
supplemental/additional deeds if required. Cancellation of the existing set of documents
would cause a discontinuity in the bank's charge on the security for the credit facility.
It is not mandatory to obtain fresh sets of documents for renewal of the credit facility. A
formal letter to the borrower agreeing to continue the credit facility by the bank for a further
period of say, one year, at his request would suffice. Acknowledgement of the debt and
security incorporating particulars of the original security document duly signed by the
borrower are obtained, at the time of renewal and attached to form part of the original set of
documents.
Revival of Time Barred Debts
When time barred debts are to be revived, the recourse may be to subsection 3 of Section 25
of the Contract Act, 1872. This section provides that a promise made in writing and signed by
the person to be charged therewith, or by his agent, generally or specially authorised in that
behalf, to pay wholly or in part, a debt, of which the creditor might have enforced payment
but for the law of limitation of suits, is not void for want of consideration.
A statement made by a witness in court, admitting a time barred debt, does not constitute a
promise to pay within the meaning of Section 25(3), (Lalan Sanbayya vs Pattan, AIR 1963
AP 337). To bring the case within the meaning of Section 25(3), it is necessary to show that
there was an express promise to pay, as a mere acknowledgement of liability, even if it
implied a promise, would not be sufficient for this purpose (Ganesh vs Mallu Mai Girdar
Das, AIR 1931 All).
The Calcutta High Court in a decision (Manoj Kumar Saha vs Nobadwip Chandra Poddar,
AIR 1978 Cal. Ill) stated that a mortgage by deposit of title deeds, in lieu of a barred debt, is
valid. Section 25(3) does not govern it because it is a payment of the debt in as much as the
mortgage virtually discharged the debt by assigning to the mortgagee an interest
corresponding in money value.
223
24.3.7 Safekeeping and Preservation of Documents
Nowadays banks give loan for a longer period say twenty years or even twenty-five years.
Until such time the entire dues are recovered, the documents are to be preserved in good
condition.
24.4 STAMPING OF DOCUMENTS
The Indian Stamp Act, 1899, contains provisions regarding instruments chargeable with duty,
mode of using stamps, time of stamping instruments, etc.
As per Section 17 of the Act, all instruments chargeable with duty and executed by any
person in India shall be stamped before or at the time of execution.
As per section 18 of the Act, every instrument, other than a bill of exchange and promissory
note, which are chargeable with duty and executed out of India may be stamped within three
months after it has been first received in India.
As per Section 19 of the Act, the first holder in India, of any bill of exchange payable
otherwise than on demand or promissory note drawn or made out of India shall affix there to
the proper stamp and cancel the same before he presents the same for acceptance or payment
or endorses or transfers or otherwise negotiates the same in India.
Section 35 of the Act provides that any person shall not admit an instrument, not duly
stamped in evidence for any purpose. However, instruments other than bill of exchange and
promissory note can be admitted in evidence on payment of duty with which the same is
chargeable together with a penalty of five rupees or ten times of the amount of proper stamp
duty, whichever is higher.
24.5 SECURITISATION
Securitisation is the process of acquisition of large non-performing asset (NPA) loan or
portfolio of loans such as housing, by Securitisation or Reconstruction Co. from a bank or
financial institution on mutually agreed terms and conditions, i.e. the sale or transfer price,
with or without recourses transfer/ sale, etc.
The SCRC transfers the acquired loans to a special purpose vehicle [SPV] set up by it, that
manages the assets for the purpose of realisation or holds them as investments till maturity.
The SPV issues the consideration of transfer price to the originator bank in the form of cash
or debentures/bonds as mutually agreed. This process provides banks and financial
institutions a summary procedure for recovery of their secured dues which have been
classified as NPA in their books, by setting up of SCRC for taking over the defaulted loans.
Till now banks/financial institutions had to enforce their security through court. This was a
very slow and a time consuming process. There was also no provision in any of the present
law in respect of hypothecation, though hypothecation is one of the major security interests
taken by the bank/financial institution. Keeping in mind the above factors, among many
others, the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets [SRFA] and Enforcement of
Security Interest Act [ESI] was enacted with effect from 21 June, 2002. The Act deals with
three aspects:
1. Enforcement of Security Interest by secured creditor (Banks/Financial Institutions).
2. Transfer of non-performing assets to Securitisation Company or Reconstruction
Company [SCRC], which will then dispose of those assets and realise the proceeds.
3. To provide a legal framework for securitisation of assets.
SCRC can either finance the acquisition from their own resources or raise resources from
Qualified
224
mutually agreed terms and on assessment of risks involved. The guidelines for such
acquisitions have been prescribed by Reserve Bank of India.
24.6 LET US SUM UP
Among the various purposes of taking documents, resorting to legal remedies, in case of
necessity, is the prime one. The various steps namely, selection of correct set of documents,
stamping at right point of time, filling in a proper manner, execution, observing the legal
formalities, keeping the documents alive always and preserving the documents till the entire
dues are recovered, discussed in this unit, will help a banker to make error-free
documentation.
24.7 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS
1. As per the Stamp Act, a document executed in India shall be stamped
(a) only before execution (b) at any time, but before filing suit
(c) within 30 days after execution (d) before or at the time of execution
2. One of the following statements is not true
(a) The Court cannot condone delay in filing suit as per Section 5 of the Limitation Act
(b) If a demand promissory note is not stamped before or at the time of execution in
India, the
defect can be cured by paying penalty
(c) When the borrower acknowledges the debt before the expiry of limitation period, the
period
of limitation is extended by one more period.
(d) If the borrower makes part payment in to the loan account before the expiry of
limitation
period, the period of limitation is extended by one more period.
24.8 ANSWERS TO 'CHECK YOUR PROGRESS'
1. (d), 2. (b).
24.9 KEYWORDS
Documentation, Demand Promissory Note, Agreement, Stamping.
DIFFERENT MODES OF CHARGING SECURITIES
STRUCTURE
25.0 Objectives
25.1 Introduction
25.2 Types of Charges
25.2.1 Assignment
25.2.2 Lien
25.2.3 Set-off
25.2.4 Hypothecation
25.2.5 Pledge
25.2.6 Mortgage
25.3 Let Us Sum Up
25.4 Check Your Progress
25.5 Answers to 'Check Your Progress'
25.6 Keywords
226
25.0 OBJECTIVES
By reading this unit, the learner will be able to get an insight into the characteristics of the
different types of charges created on 'securities'.
25.1 INTRODUCTION
Banks tend to safeguard their advances by taking different kinds of securities. The main
purpose of taking a security is to fall back on it in case the loan is defaulted. Banks take
movable properties, immovable properties or a debt as security for a loan. The method of
creating charge over a property depends upon the nature of property and nature of charge. For
example, when a bank gives a loan against the security of gold ornaments, it takes the
possession of the ornaments whereas when it advances against the security of a vehicle or a
house property, the bank does not take physical possession.
25.2 TYPES OF CHARGES
Banks charge over properties confines itself to one or more of the following six types of
charges.
(a) Assignment (b) Lien (c) Set-off
(d) Hypothecation (e) Pledge (f) Mortgage
25.2.1 Assignment
It is a mode of providing security to a banker for an advance. It is transfer of a right, property
or a debt. The transferor is called assignor and the transferee assignee.
Borrowers generally assign the actionable claims to the banker as security for an advance. In
terms of Section 130 of the Transfer of Property Act, the transfer of an actionable claim can
be effected only by the execution of an instrument in writing, signed by transferor or by his
duly authorised agent. Section 3 of the Transfer of Property Act defines an actionable claim
as a claim to any debt other than a debt secured by mortgage of immovable property or by
hypothecation or pledge of movable property or to any beneficial interest in movable
property, not in the possession of the claimant, which the Civil Courts recognise as affording
grounds of relief. All the rights and remedies of the transferor vest in the transferee. The
transferee of an actionable claim takes it, subject to all the liabilities and equities to which the
transferor was subject on the date of the transfer.
In banking practice, a borrower may assign the book debt, money due from Government
department, and life insurance policies as security for an advance.
As regards the mode of assignment, no particular form or words is necessary for effecting an
assignment, if the intention is clear from the language used. An assignment can be absolute or
by way of security.
An assignment may be a legal or equitable assignment. A legal assignment is the absolute
transfer of an actionable claim, must be in writing and signed by the assignor. The assignor
informs his debtor, also in writing, intimating the assignee's name and address. The assignee
also serves a notice on the debtor and seeks his confirmation of balance assigned. If the
formality is not fulfilled, the assignment is called an equitable assignment.
Under the provisions of the Insurance Act, a life insurance policy is assignable by an
endorsement on the back of the policy or by a separate deed of assignment, but notice of such
assignment must be given to the insurer by the assignee or assignor.
25.2.2 Lien
Lien is the right of the banker to retain possession of the goods and securities owned by the
debtor until the debt due from the latter is paid. The banker's lien is an implied pledge. A
banker acquires the right
227
to sell the goods which came into its possession in the ordinary course of banking business, in
case the debt is not paid. Section 171 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 gives to the banker an
absolute right of general lien on all goods and securities received by the banker. However,
when a customer inadvertently leaves a packet containing certain share certificates, life
insurance policies, fixed deposit receipts of other banks, etc., while leaving the bank
premises, the banker will have no right of lien over those securities because those were not
given to the banker in the normal course of banking business.
25.2.3 Set-off
Set-off means total or partial merging of a claim of one person against another in a counter
claim by the latter against the former. It is in effect, the combining of accounts of the debtor
and creditor, to arrive at the net balance payable to one or the other. The right of set-off is a
statutory right and can also arise out of an agreement between parties.
Salient Features of Set-off
(a) Both debts must be for certain sums. A debt-accruing due cannot be set-off against the
debt already due.
(b) The banker cannot set-off the credit balance in the account of guarantor till the
liability of the
guarantor is determined.
(c) The credit balance in the current account cannot be set-off against a contingent
liability of a bill
discounted but not yet due.
(d) A banker cannot set-off a debt due to him upon a loan account repayable on demand
or at a specified date against a credit balance in the current account until the demand is made
or due date arrives.
(e) The parties must be mutually indebted in the same right.
(f) The credit balance in the partner's account can be set-off against the debit balance of a
partnership account since the liability of the partners is joint and several.
(g) Right of set-off is exercisable between two firms, which have separate names but are
composed of
same set-of partners.
(h) The credit balance in the personal account of a sole proprietor can be set-off against the
debit balance of the sole proprietary concern and vice versa, (i) When the right set-off is
available to the bank, lien right cannot apply. These two different rights cannot be exercised
simultaneously at the same time.
Automatic right of set-off arises in the following circumstances:
(a) On the death, insanity or insolvency of the customer
(b) On the insolvency of a partner of a firm or winding up of a company
(c) On receipt of a garnishee order
(d) On receipt of notice of assignment of a customer's credit balance.
25.2.4 Hypothecation
The term 'Hypothecation' means a charge in or upon any movable property, existing or future,
created by a borrower in favour of a secured creditor, without delivery of possession of the
movable property to such creditor, as a security for financial assistance and includes floating
charge and crystallisation of such charge in to fixed charge on movable property.
The mortgage of movable property is called 'Hypothecation'. It may be described as 'a
transaction whereby money is borrowed by the debtor (owner of the goods) on the security of
the moveable property without transferring either the property or the possession to the
creditor'. Hart describes hypothecation as 'a charge against property for an amount of debt
where neither ownership nor possession is passed to the creditor'. Hypothecation differs from
pledge because goods remain in the possession of the borrower
228
and are equitably charged in favour of the creditor under documents signed by the borrower.
However, the document provides for a covenant, whereby the borrower agrees to give
possession of the goods when called upon to do so by the creditor. Once the possession is
given up, the charge becomes transformed into pledge.
Hypothecation differs from mortgage in two respects. Firstly, mortgage relates to immoveable
property whereas hypothecation relates to movables. Secondly, in a mortgage, there is
transfer of interest in the property to the creditor but in hypothecation there is only obligation
to repay money and no transfer of interest.
25.2.5 Pledge
'Pledge means bailment of goods for purpose of providing security for payment of debt or
performance of promise' (as per the section Section 172 of Contract Act, 1872).
The person, whose goods are bailed is called the Pawnor, the person who takes the goods as
security is called the Pawnee.
The following are the legal implications of a pledge:
(a) The ownership of the property is retained by the pawnor, which is subject only to the
qualified interest which passes to the pawnee by the bailment.
(b) One of the main and most essential requirements of a pledge is the actual or
constructive delivery of the goods tu the pawnee. By constructive delivery, it is meant that
there need be no physical transfer of goods from the custody of the pledger/pawnor to the
pawnee. AH that is required is that the goods must be placed in the possession of the pawnee
or of any person authorised to hold them on his behalf.
Goods may be delivered by one of the following ways (as mentioned in the Sale of Goods
Act):
(i) By handing over the key of the godown, in which the goods are kept,
(ii) By attornment, i.e. if goods are in public warehouse, the warehouseman acknowledges to
the pawnee that he will hold the goods thereafter on behalf of the pawnee,
(iii) Handing over the document of title to goods, such as railway receipt, bill of lading,
warehouse receipts, etc.
(iv) Even if goods are in possession of the pawnor, he may acknowledge that he holds them
thereafter for and on behalf of the pawnee..
(v) An agreement of pledge may be implied from the nature of the transaction or the
circumstances of the case. However, an agreement in writing clearly laying down the terms
and conditions leaves no ambiguity.
25.2.6 Mortgage
Mortgage is a transfer of interest in immoveable property to secure an advanced loan, or an
existing debt or a future debt or performance of an obligation. Transfer of Property Act
contemplates six types of mortgages, they are:
(a) Simple mortgage (b) Mortgage by conditional sale
(c) Usufructuary mortgage (d) English mortgage
(e) Mortgage by deposit of title deeds (f) Anomalous mortgage
In simple mortgage, the mortgage is by deposit of title deeds and in English mortgage, the
possession of the mortgaged properties is not given to the mortgagee.
In usufructuary mortgage and in mortgage by conditional sale, possession of mortgaged
properties is normally given to the mortgagee.
229
In the case of simple mortgage and mortgage by deposit of title deeds, the mortgagee has a
right to proceed against the property mortgaged and also personally against the mortgagor.
Mortgage is to be created by way of deed and requires to be registered under the Registration
Act.
Mortgage by deposit of title deeds, is not required to be created by way of a deed and does
not require registration.
The rule of priority in case of successive mortgages is in the order of time they are created.
Limitation period for filing a suit for sale of mortgaged property is twelve years from the date
mortgage debt becomes due.
Limitation period for filing a suit for foreclosure is thirty years from the date mortgage debt
becomes due.
Enforcement of mortgage is governed by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. Suit for sale of
mortgaged properties should be filed in the Court, within whose jurisdiction the mortgage
property is situated.
In a suit for sale of mortgaged properties, the Court first passes a preliminary decree and
thereafter a final decree.
25.3 LET US SUM UP
The charge of pledge and hypothecation applies with respect to movable properties. In the
case of pledge, the possession of the property is transferred and it is not so in the case of
hypothecation. In both cases, the ownership does not change. The Indian Contract Act
specifies the rights of the pledger and pledgee. Among the various mortgages, normally, the
mortgage by deposit of title deeds and simple mortgage are usually taken by banks. Resort to
a charge of assignment is done in case of an advance against LIPs. Lien is the right of
retention whereas set-off is the right of combining two mutually due accounts and arriving at
the net balance due.
25.4 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS
1. One of the following statements is not true in the right of set-off.
(a) Set-off means partial or total merging of a claim of one person against another in a
counter claim of the latter against the former.
(b) Both debts must be for certain sum.
(c) A debt accruing due cannot be set-off.
(d) A banker can set-off the credit balance in the guarantor's account before the liability
of the guarantor to the bank is determined.
2. State true or false:
(a) In the case of assignment of LIP as a security to an advance, the assignment is not
complete unless a notice of assignment is given to the Insurance Company.
(b) The above notice of assignment may be given either by the assignor or by the
assignee.
(c) The banker's lien is an implied pledge.
(d) When a customer inadvertently leaves a packet containing certain share certificates
while leaving the bank premises, the banker can take these securities under lien against
certain liability incurred by the customer to the bank.
(e) Right of lien and right of set-off can be exercised simultaneously at the same time.
(f) There is less risk for a bank when hypothecation facility is granted to a Company,
because of the registration of the bank's charge with the ROC.
230
(g) One of the essential requirements of a pledge is the actual or constructive delivery of the
goods pledged by the pawner to the pawnee, (h) Limitation period for filing a suit for sale of
mortgaged property is thirty years from the date mortgage debt becomes due.
25.5 ANSWERS TO 'CHECK YOUR PROGRESS'
1. (d); 2. (a) T, (b) T, (c) T, (d) F, (e) F, (f) T, (g) T, (h) F.
25.6 KEYWORDS
Assignment, Set-off, Lien, Implied Pledge, Auctionable Claim, Legal Assignment, Equitable
Assignment, Attornment, Constructive Delivery, Usufructuary Mortgage, Simple Mortgage.
UNIT
26TYPES OF COLLATERALS AND THEIR CHARACTERISTICS
STRUCTURE
26.0 Objectives
26.1 Introduction
26.2 Land and Buildings
26.2.1 Examining the Title to the Property
26.2.2 Documents to be Called for from the Mortgagor
26.2.3 Valuation of Property
26.2.4 Leasehold Properties
26.3 Goods
26.3.1 Precautions for Advance against Goods
26.3.2 Storing of Goods
26.3.3 Inspection of Stocks
26.3.4 Stock Audit
26.3.5 Valuation
26.3.6 Margin of Stock
26.3.7 Recovery in Case of Default
26.4 Documents of title to goods
26.4.1 The Essential Requisites of a Document of Title to Goods
26.4.2 Merits of this Security
26.4.3 Demerits of this Security
26.4.4 Precautions to be taken by the Banker
26.4.5 Trust Receipts
26.5 Advances against Life Insurance Policies
26.5.1 Points to be taken in to Consideration
26.5.2 Assignment of the Policy
26.6 Advance Against Shares
26.6.1 Statutory Limit on Shareholding in Companies
26.6.2
26.6.3 Regulatory Limits of the Banks' Exposure to Capital Market
Advances against shares to Individuals
232
26.6.4 Advances against Shares to Stockbrokers and Market Makers
26.6.5 Margins on Advances against Shares/Issue of Guarantees
26.6.6 Bank Finance to Employees to Buy Shares of their Own Companies
26.7 Loan against Book Debts
26.7.1 Risks in Lending upon Account Receivables
26.7.2 Factors to be Considered while Advancing against Book Debts
26.7.3 Method of Charging the Security
26.7.4 Modes of Financing Book Debts
26.7.5 Guidelines
26.7.6 Verification of Book Debts
26.7.7 Other Aspects
26.8 Loan against Term Deposits
26.8.1 Nature of Facility
26.8.2 Margin and Rate of Interest
26.8.3 Deposits in the Name of Minor
26.8.4 Other Aspects
26.9 Loan against Gold Ornaments
26.9.1 Important Aspects
26.10 Supply Bills
26.10.1 Procedure to be Followed in Respect of Supply Bills
26.10.2 Risks Involved in Advancing against Supply Bills
26.10.3 Precautions to be Taken by the Banker
26.11 Let Us Sum Up
26.12 Check Your Progress
26.13 Answer to 'Check Your Progress'
26.14 Keywords
233
26.0 OBJECTIVES
By reading this unit, the learner will be able to know the different types of securities taken by
bankers, while advancing and the characteristics of these securities.
26.1 INTRODUCTION
Banks are financial intermediaries where the resources of the public are mobilised and lent to
various sectors of the economy. The money mobilised from the public by way of deposit is
repayable as and when demanded by the depositors. Therefore, bankers take utmost care to
see that the money lent to various types of borrowers is repaid as per the repayment schedule
along with interest. In order to safeguard the advance, bankers normally take securities, on
which they fall back in case the borrowers commit default.
In the banking practice, the securities offered by the borrowers are of different types. They
may be immovable security, movable security, debts, etc. The land and buildings, machineries
embedded to earth, etc., come under the category of immovable, whereas goods, vehicles,
furniture, machineries, gold ornaments, etc., come under the category of movable securities.
Accounts receivable, known as book debts, get classified as intangible securities. Whatever
may be the nature of the securities, the banker, while taking them, has to ensure that
• they are saleable, whenever the need arises, as in the case of default by borrowers.
• the value of the securities is ascertainable at any time from reliable sources, to fix the
drawing limit, saleable value, etc.
• the value is not subject to heavy fluctuation; otherwise banks have to fix a higher
percentage of margin.
• they are easily transferable without, as far as possible, going through legal formalities.
Classification of security may also be as personal and tangible as well as primary and
collateral. Personal security means personal liability. The banker has a right of action against
the borrower, e.g. guarantee. Tangible security is something that can be realised by a sale or
transfer, e.g. land, goods, stock.
Classification of security is also as a primary security and collateral security. Primary security
is one that is regarded as the main cover for an advance; generally, assets against which
advance is made. For example, stock for cash credits, machinery for term loans. Collateral
security is security other than the primary security lodged by the borrower or by a third party.
Let us see about types of collaterals and their characteristics.
26.2 LAND AND BUILDINGS
This type of security is not self-liquidating nature. In the event of the bank wanting to sell the
property for recovering its advance, it can do so through the legal process. Normally, banks
have to file a suit before the civil court for recovery, if the amount due in the loan account is
less than Rs. ten lakh and, before the Debt Recovery Tribunal (DRT), if the amount due is Rs.
ten lakh and above. However, under the provisions of the Securitisation and Reconstruction
of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest (SARFAESI) Act, 2002, banks can
sell the immovable property taken, by way of mortgage, without intervention of the court
after observing the formalities mentioned in the Act. Because of this right of sale without the
court intervention, this type of security has gained importance now and viewed with favour
by banks. The nature of charge created on this type of security is mortgage.
Mortgage of immovable property is either primary or collateral security. If any advance is
granted
234
against the primary security of immovable property, the purpose for which such advance is
sanctioned is to be made very clear. If it is sanctioned for working capital purposes, the
follow-up review/renewal proposal as applicable to working capital/cash credit facilities
should be followed. In other cases, if any overdraft against title deeds is sanctioned, it is
desirable to fix a realistic repayment programme as in the case of term loans.
26.2.1 Examining the Title to the Property
Before any immovable property is accepted as security, the title to the borrower over the said
property should be examined by the bank's lawyer, to ascertain that the person in whose name
the property stands has a good, valid, subsisting and marketable title over the property, that
the property is free from all encumbrances and is not subject to any litigation or attachment
from any Court or Statutory authorities.
26.2.2 Documents to be Called for from the Mortgagor
(a) All material documents of title, like the sale deed/gift deed/will/partition deed
conveying the title in his favour.
(b) Parent documents for the prescribed period to ascertain the flow of title. Some banks
call for parent documents for thirty years.
(c) Encumbrance certificate, normally for thirteen years to see, if any encumbrance
subsists on the property. It is advisable to apply for an encumbrance certificate for the
property through the bank's advocate so as to avoid manipulation.
(d) Tax receipts for the property to evidence the possession of the property by the
proposed mortgagor.
(e) If the property offered is standing in the name of a minor, permission of the competent
court to encumber the property.
(f) Search report, if the immovable property belongs to a joint stock company, in order to
ascertain any charge is subsisting on the property.
(g) Normally, banks take an opinion from their panel advocate regarding the clear, good
and marketable title of the proposed mortgagor over the property. The advocate should see
that the documents produced are genuine and not fake. The advocate's opinion should be
clear and unconditional and should certify that a valid mortgage can be created by the
proposed mortgagor over the property.
26.2.3 Valuation of Property
Where an advance is desired against the security of an immovable property, it is necessary to
get it valued by an approved engineer of the bank before the grant of the advance. Valuation
must be conservative, realistic and should be on a forced sale basis.
In fixing the valuation, the points for consideration are:
(a) The nature of construction (b) Nature of title, free-hold or lease-
hold
(c) Age of the building and its present strength (d) The rent yield
(e) Taxes paid (f) Area of the land and building
(g) Value of the site (h) Cost of construction
(i) Its location
26.2.4 Leasehold Properties
If the land is a leasehold, it is necessary to ascertain whether the terms of the lease permit the
borrower to assign or transfer by way of mortgage, the leasehold rights in the land. It must be
ensured that the repayment of loan by the borrower does not extend beyond the period of
lease.
It is advisable to apply for an encumbrance certificate for the property through the bank's
advocate. The bank must inspect the property offered as security, to ensure existence and
must also make an inquiry through independent sources to satisfy the ownership of the
property.
235
26.3 GOODS
Banks advance loans routinely against the security of goods such as agricultural goods, raw
material, semi finished goods, finished goods. An advance against goods may be extended by
way of; loan, key cash credit or open cash credit. The nature of the charge created may be
either a pledge or hypothecation. When the possession of the goods is transferred to the
banker, as in the case of key cash credit, the nature of charge created is a pledge. When the
possession of goods is not transferred, as in the case of open cash credit, the nature of charge
created is hypothecation. In either case of pledge and hypothecation, the title in the goods is
not transferred to the bank.
An advance granted against goods is known as trade finance. Such advances are of short-term
nature and are granted for meeting the working capital requirement of the borrower.
While considering an advance against goods, the banker should see that the goods offered as
security are not perishable, are readily saleable, are not obsolete, possess a price which is
easily ascertainable and are capable of easy handling and transport.
26.3.1 Precautions for Advance against Goods
The borrower should be dealing in the goods for a sufficient period
(a) No advance should be made for speculation or hoarding purpose
(b) The goods charged to the bank should have been fully paid
(c) The goods should command good demand in the market
(d) The age of the stock should be taken into consideration
(e) The ownership of the goods shall be ensured by verifying with the original paid
invoices
(f) Stipulated margin should be maintained at all times
(h) Borrower should be asked to arrange the goods in the godown in such a way that stocks of
different kinds are kept separately. (i) The goods should have adequate insurance against
risks such as fire, strike riot etc.
26.3.2 Storing of Goods
The stocks should be arranged in an order, in distinctive lots such that verification of stocks is
easy and samples of stocks from different lots, if required, can be taken. Hazardous goods
should be removed from non hazardous goods and kept separately. Goods should be stored in
such godowns that are of good construction so that they can be protected from the vagaries of
weather or monsoon. It also be ensured that the godowns are good from the safety point of
view.
26.3.3 Inspection of Stocks
All the stocks charged to the bank under a pledge/hypothecation are subject to inspection,
without any exception. Verification of the stock is required at regular intervals, say once in a
month. An element of surprise in the inspection is also desireable. Borrower's vehicle should
not be normally used for the purpose of inspection, as it would enable them to set things right
before the inspection. In case goods are stored in bags, the inspecting official of the bank
should count the number of bags and if necessary weigh a few of them at random. A few of
the bags selected at random may be ordered to be opened to ensure that the goods stated to
have been stored are actually held in bags. Verify borrowers' records, if any, such as purchase
register, sales register, stock register, sales tax records, excise records.
26.3.4 Stock Audit
Stock audit is an effective credit monitoring tool, which offers an opportunity for making a
qualitative assessment of the advance. Stock audits also contribute to an improvement in the
borrower's management of inventories and receivables. This
236
initiation of suitable and timely remedial measures. The stock audit of borrowal accounts
enjoying fund based and non fund based working capital facilities above a cut-off limit, say
Rs. 1 crore, at least once in a year should be conducted by the lending bankers.
For the advance against warehouse receipts, the goods covered by the warehouse receipt are
inspected at periodic intervals. Following points are noted with regard to the stocks in a
warehouse. Receipts are issued by an approved warehousing agency in the prescribed form.
The borrower should endorse the warehouse receipt against which advance is made. Goods
covered by the warehouse receipt should not be deteriorating in nature. Inspecting bank
official should ensure that warehouse goods (nature, quality, grade, etc.) are the same as
stated in the warehouse receipt. It should be ensured that stocks held by the warehouse
authority are favoured for the full cost price or market price. Particulars of the insurance
policy obtained and recorded from the warehouse authority in the bank's books.
26.3.5 Valuation
Normally, valuation of the stock is done on the basis of cost price or market price whichever
is less.
26.3.6 Margin of Stock
Maintaining an adequate margin on the stock as stipulated in the sanction. Drawing power is
calculated after deducting the margin to be maintained. Where a part of the stock is unpaid,
such portion of the equalling the value of the unpaid stock is removed from the total value
and the stipulated margin is maintained thereafter.
26.3.7 Recovery in Case of Default
Generally, the agreement of hypothecation executed by the borrower at the time of grant of
the advance contains a clause empowering the bank to take possession of the hypothecated
goods and sell it privately or in a public auction and to appropriate the sale proceeds towards
the loan account. Whether the banker can exercise this right without the intervention of the
Court is a matter on which different Courts have given different verdicts. However, the
Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest
Act, 2002, gave a right to the hypothecatee bank to take possession of the goods
hypothecated and to sell it without Court's intervention after observing certain formalities.
In the case of pledged goods, Section 176 of the Indian Contract Act gives a right to the
pledgee (bank) to sell the things pledged after giving a reasonable notice to the pledgor.
26.4 DOCUMENTS OF TITLE TO GOODS
Section 2(4) of Sale of Goods Act defines a document of title to goods as "a document used
in the ordinary course of business as a proof of possession or control of goods authorising or
purporting to authorise either by endorsement or delivery, the possessor of the documents to
transfer or to receive the goods thereby represented".
26.4.1 The Essential Requisites of a Document of Title to Goods
The mere possession of documents creates a right by virtue of either law or trade or usage, to
possess the goods represented by the documents.
Goods represented by the documents are transferrable by endorsement and/or delivery of the
documents. The transferee of the document can take delivery of the goods in his own right.
Although it appears to be a negotiable instrument, they are not negotiable instruments, since
the bonafide transferee for value can be affected by defects in the title of transferor. They may
be called quasi negotiable instruments.
237
Examples of documents of title to goods are bill of lading, dock warrant, warehouse-keepers
certificate, railway receipts, delivery orders, etc.
26.4.2 Merits of this Security
By mere pledge of the instruments, goods are pledged and serve as a good security. The
person in possession of the document can transfer the goods by endorsement and delivery.
The transferee thereafter is entitled to take delivery of goods in his own rights. The
documents are easily transferable and the formalities involved are minimum.
26.4.3 Demerits of this Security
Possibility for Fraud and Dishonesty
Since the bill of lading/railway receipt or a warehouse-keepers certificate, does not certify or
guarantee the correctness of the contents of the bags or packages, the banker will have no
remedy against the carrier or warehouse keeper, if they turn out to be worthless.
Forged and Altered Documents
The documents might be forged ones, or even if genuine, the quantity may be altered.
Not negotiable documents: The documents being 'Not negotiable' the transferee of such
documents will not get a better title than that of transferor. Therefore, if a person who pledged
the documents has a defective title, the banker will not acquire a better title.
Unpaid Vendors right of stoppage in transit: Under the Sale of Goods Act, an unpaid vendor
has the right of stoppage in transit and he is entitled to direct the carrier that the goods not be
delivered, if not already done. If the unpaid vendor exercises this right, banker cannot obtain
the goods and his security is of no value.
In case of lost documents, delivery of goods is allowed in the execution of an indemnity
bond, which can be misused by the borrower. To avoid such a contingency, the banker can
give notice to the carrier regarding his interest in the goods.
26.4.4 Precautions to be taken by the Banker
The documents must be examined thoroughly to ensure that they are genuine and of recent
origin. In the case of bills of lading, they are prepared in triplicate and as such all the copies
must be obtained by the banker. The banker should ensure that the documents do not contain
any onerous clause or prejudicial remark about the conditions of goods received. Banker
should ensure that the goods are adequately covered by insurance for their full value against
the risk of theft, fire, damage in transit, etc., and in the case of goods shipped by sea, all the
marine risks should be covered.
26.4.5 Trust Receipts
Whenever the bank releases documents of title of goods to the borrower without a payment,
then a letter of trust should be taken. So also in the case of goods hypothecated to the bank.
The reasons are that:
(a) the borrower, on sale of the goods has to hold proceeds in trust for the banker
(b) the goods taken under such trust receipts or the sale proceeds thereof are not available
to the
Official Receiver in case the borrower becomes insolvent.
A trust letter incorporates the following clauses:
(a) borrower's recognition of bank's rights in the goods as a security and in case of sale, the
proceeds thereof
238
(b) borrower's undertaking to hold the goods or the sale proceeds thereof in trust for the
banker
(c) borrower's undertaking to ensure proper storage and insurance at his cost
(d) borrower's undertaking to direct the buyer to pay the monies directly to the banker, if
so required by the banker
(e) borrower's undertaking to return unsold goods on banker's request or dispose of the
same as directed by the banker.
26.5 ADVANCES AGAINST LIFE INSURANCE POLICIES
Life insurance policies are acceptable either as a primary or collateral security for an
advance.
26.5.1 Points to be taken in to Consideration
Before making an advance, the points to be taken in to consideration are:
• The policy must be in force and the premium paid up to date. The latest premium
receipt must be kept on record by the bank.
• The policy should be an original, duly stamped and signed by the issuing authority.
• The policy should be free from restrictive/onerous clauses.
• The insurance company should have admitted to the age of the assured.
Generally, the following life policies are not acceptable as security
(a) Children endowment policy.
(b) Policies taken out specifically for purposes like estate duty.
(c) Children deferred policy.
(d) Policies with nominations under Section 6 of the Married Women's Property Act.
Banks lend against the life policies based on surrender value. Surrender value is the amount,
which the insurance company will pay if the policy is surrendered.
26.5.2 Assignment of the Policy
The assignment on the policy or on a separate stamped paper should be obtained and it should
be witnessed by a person. Nominee under the policy need not join in assigning the policy as
nomination under the policy is automatically cancelled in the event of assignment of the
policy. The assignment shall not be operative as against the insurance company until the
notice in writing of assignment is given to the insurance company.
In case of death of the assured, the assignee becomes entitled to receive the policy amount.
When the advance is repaid, the policy has to be reassigned in favour of the policyholder.
26.6 ADVANCE AGAINST SHARES
Advances against shares should be for productive purposes and not for speculative purposes.
Banks provide either a demand loan or an overdraft against the security of the shares. The
nature of charge created while making advances against shares is pledge. Now banks insist,
the shares to be in demat form while advancing. Advance are granted against fully paid shares
only. The shares should be quoted in a recognized stock exchange. No loan can be given
against the shares of a private limited company.
26.6.1 Statutory Limit on shareholding in companies.
In terms of section 19(2) of the Banking Regulation act, 1949, no banking company shall
hold shares in any company, whether as pledge, mortgagee, or absolute owner, of an amount
exceeding thirty per cent of the paid up share capital of that company or thirty percent of its
own paid up share capital and
239
reserves, whichever is less. Shares held in the demat form should also be included for the
purpose of determining the exposure limit.
26.6.2 Regulatory Limits of the Banks' Exposure to Capital Market
The RBI guidelines on banks' financing against shares, debenture, etc., are given below:
Banks' aggregate exposure to the capital market covering direct investment, in equity shares,
convertible bonds and debentures, units of equity oriented mutual funds, all exposures to
'Venture Capital Funds' (VCFs) [both registered and unregistered], advances, against shares to
individuals for investment in equity shares (including IPOs/ESOPs), bonds and debentures,
units of equity oriented mutual funds, etc., secured and unsecured advances to stockbrokers,
guarantees issued on the behalf of stockbrokers and market makers, should not exceed five
per cent of their total outstanding advances (including Commercial Paper) as on 31 March, of
the previous year. This ceiling of five per cent prescribed for investments in shares would
apply to a total exposure including both the fund based and non fund based exposure to
capital market in all forms. Within this overall ceiling, the banks' investment in shares,
convertible bonds and debentures, units of equity oriented mutual funds, all exposures to
Venture Capital Funds (VCFs) [both registered and unregistered] should not exceed twenty
per cent of their net worth. The banks are bound to this ceiling on an ongoing basis.
26.6.3 Advances against Shares to Individuals
Loans against the security of shares, debentures and PSU bonds to individuals should not
exceed the limit of Rs. 10 lakh per individual borrower, if the securities are held in physical
form and Rs. 20 lakh per individual borrower, if the securities are held in a demat form. The
banks can grant advances to employees for purchasing shares of their own companies under
the 'Employees Stock Option Plan' (ESOP) to the extent of ninety per cent of the purchase
price of shares or Rs. 20 lakh, whichever is lower. Further, banks can extend loans up to
Rs.10 lakh to individuals for subscribing to IPOs. Finance extended by a bank for
IPOs/ESOPs will be reckoned as an exposure to capital market.
Banks should formulate, with the approval of their boards, the lending policy for grant of
advances to individuals against shares, debentures, bonds keeping in view the RBI guidelines.
As a prudential measure, the banks may also consider laying down appropriate aggregate
sublimits for such advances.
26.6.4 Advances against Shares to Stockbrokers and Market Makers
Banks are free to provide credit facilities to stockbrokers and market makers on the basis of
their commercial judgment, within the policy framework approved by their boards. However,
in order to avoid any nexus emerging between interconnected stock broking entities and
banks, the board of each bank should fix, within the overall ceiling of five per cent of their
total outstanding advances (including Commercial Paper) as on 31 March of the previous
year, a subceiling for total advances to:
• all the stockbrokers and market makers (both fund based and non fund based, i.e.
guarantees)
• to any single stock broking entity, including its associates/inter-connected companies
26.6.5 Margins on Advances against SharesAssue of Guarantees
A uniform margin of fifty per cent shall be applicable on all advances/financing of IPOs/issue
of guarantees. A minimum cash margin of twenty five per cent (within the margin of fifty per
cent) shall be maintained in respect of guarantees issued by banks for capital market
operations.
26.6.6 Bank Finance to Employees to Buy Shares of their Own Companies
Banks may provide finance to assist employees to buy shares of their own companies under
ESOPs to the extent of ninety per cent of the purchase price of the shares or Rs. 20 lakh,
whichever is lower. However, all such financing should be treated as part of the bank’s
exposure to capital market within
240
the overall ceiling of five percent of bank’s total outstanding advances, as on 31 March , of
the previous year. These instructions , however will not be applicable to the banks’ exceeding
financial assistance to their own employees for acquisition of shares under ESOPs/ IPOs.
Banks, therefore should not extend advances, including advances to their employees/
employee trust set up by them , for the purpose of purchasing their (bank’s) own shares under
ESOP/ IPO or from secondary market. This prohibitions will apply irrespective of whether
the advances are unsecured or secured.
26.7 LOAN AGAINST BOOK DEBTS
Book debts are claims arising out of credit sale. Credit sales can be effected in two ways:
1. by drawing bills
2. by debiting the purchaser's account.
The total of the bills outstanding is called 'Bills Receivable' and the total of debit balance in
the purchaser's account is called 'Account Receivable'. These account receivables are called
book debts. This represents the amount receivable from others on account of trade
transactions.
26.7.1 Risks in Lending upon account Receivables
(a) The account may be fictitious, old or disputed.
(b) The integrity of the borrower may not warrant the risk
(c) the proceeds may not be turned over to the bank for the credit of the borrower’s account.
(d) To give notice of assignment to every debtor may pose practical difficulty.
26.7.2 Factors to be considered while advancing against Book debts
the integrity of the borrower should be par excellence. Hence, a thorough investigation of the
borrower should be done and only if the credit worthiness of the borrower is found
satisfactory, an advance of this nature should be considered.
The credi worthiness and standing of the purchaser of the borrower’s produce should be
ascertained.
Banker should take care to see that accounts receivable against which finance is to be given
do not pertain to one buyer only.
26.7.3 Method of charging the Security
Book debts are charged by way of assignment or hypothecation.. While assignment is transfer
of the right to the bank to recover the debt, the hypothecation creates an equitable charge or
interest on the book debt.
26.7.4 Modes of financing Book Debts
Book debts can be financed by:
(a) Factoring
(b) forfeiting (outright purchase of book debts)
(c) Overdraft, cash credit against hypothecation of book debts
26.7.5 Guidelines
This facility should be restricted to first class borrowers whose integrity and credit worthiness
are beyond question. It should be ensured that the borrower keeps his account in a proper
manner and the same are audited regularly.Book debts offered as security should be of those
customers whose record of accomplishment, reputation and status are satisfactory. The
borrower should have an effective debt
241
collection and control mechanism. Age of the book debts should not be more than six months.
Some banks do not consider book debts of more than three months. Normally, a margin of 50
per cent is maintained.
26.7.6 Verification of Book Debts
Sales invoices and debtors ledgers are to be verified, to ascertain the overdue receivable
position, over due debtors, reasons for long outstanding, if any, possibility of recovery.
Verification of the list of buyers to ascertain whether a major share of the sales is to a single
buyer. If so, the market opinion on them is to be obtained. If sales are to sister concerns, the
sales invoice and the modalities of transactions effected, verification of realization of such
receivables becomes a necessisity. It is to be ensured that all the book debts have arisen out of
genuine trade transactions and do not comprise lending transactions of the following nature:
• Transactions with sister concerns - not related with business activity.
• Advance payments, which are not likely to be realised within the period of working
capital cycle.
• Advance payment for capital expenditure.
• Any other advance payments disguised as debtor arising out of sale transaction.
26.7.7 Other Aspects
Confirmation obtained from debtors for outstanding dues whenever debt arises. Ensuring that
the age of the book debts declared is as specified in the terms of sanction. It is to be ensured
that the bills discounted are not declared, simply for purposes of arriving at 'Drawing Power'.
Verification that bills returned and resubmitted are not financed again.
26.8 LOAN AGAINST TERM DEPOSITS
26.8.1 Nature of Facility
Banks often lend against their term deposits, such as fixed deposits, cumulative deposits,
recurring deposits, etc. The nature of a facility granted against the security of term deposits
may either be a loan or an overdraft. The nature of charge created while granting this type of
loan is a pledge.
26.8.2 Margin and Rate of Interest
Normally, banks lend up to ninety per cent of the deposit amount/accrued value of the
deposit. The rate of interest charged on the loan would be one per cent or two per cent above
the interest rate offered on the deposit.
The borrower can repay the loan out of his sources on any date before the maturity. If not
paid in full before the maturity of the deposits, only the surplus if any will be paid to the
party. If there is any shortfall in the maturity proceeds of deposit, the party has to pay the
same to the bank.
26.8.3 Deposits in the Name of Minor
Normally, no loan can be granted against the security of deposit receipt standing in the name
of a minor. However, if the loan is sought by the guardian for the necessities of the minor
depositor, the bank may consider it on getting from the guardian an undertaking letter to the
effect that the proceeds of loan would be utilized only for the necessities of the minor
depositor.
26.8.4 Other Aspects
While granting the facility, banks get the deposit receipt duly discharged by the deposit
holder. In case of more than one deposit holder, all of them should discharge the deposit
receipt. The depositor should execute necessarv loan documents. In case of more than one
depositor, all of them should execute the
242
documents or one of them on the strength of authorisation letter given by the depositors who
is/are not executing the loan documents.
Loan given to a sole proprietor against deposits in the name of the proprietary concern should
not be treated as a third-party loan, whereas loan granted to a partner against the deposits in
the name of the firm should be classified as third-party loan and interest shall be charged at
the commercial rate.
In case of premature closure of deposits, the interest should be 1 -2 per cent over the actual
rate of interest applicable for the prematurely closed deposit.
Loan can be granted against deposits receipt of other branches of the same bank. However,
before grant of loan, lien should be noted in the records of the deposit branch.
Where a loan sought by a company against its deposits, a board resolution authorising the
company to raise the loan should be obtained. The charge of pledge need not be registered
with the ROC.
No loan can be considered against a deposit held under the 'Capital Gain Scheme'.
26.9 LOAN AGAINST GOLD ORNAMENTS
Banks give loans against gold ornaments for agricultural as well as for non-agricultural
purposes. The nature of charge created while giving this type of loan is a pledge. Some banks
allow a overdraft also against the security of gold ornaments.
26.9.1 Important Aspects
(a) The amount of loan on ornaments depends upon the market value and purity of the
gold. Normally, banks keep a margin of around thirty per cent on the market value of the
ornaments.
(b) The rate of interest varies with the purpose of the loan. A loan cannot be given against
the security of pure gold.
(c) The repayment period depends upon the purpose of the loan. If the loan is for
agricultural purpose, the repayment period normally coincides with the harvest and marketing
of the produce.
(d) On closure of the loan, the ornaments should be returned to the pledgor or his
authorized representative.
(e) Even after the closure of this loan, the banker can retain the possession of the
ornaments, if any other overdue loan is there in the name of the borrower, by exercising the
right of general lien.
(f) In case of a default in repayment of the loan, the bank as pledgee has the right to sell
the ornaments pledged, in an auction or by private sale, only after giving to the pledgor a
reasonable notice of intended sale as per Section 176 of the Indian Contract Act; otherwise
the bank has to compensate
the borrower for the loss suffered. The expenses incurred by the bank in connection with
notice of sale, including paper publication if any, shall be recovered from the party.
(g) Normally, banks appoint appraisers for the purpose of appraising the purity of the
gold ornaments,
(h) The loan granted under this category is subject to NPA norms.
26.10 SUPPLY BILLS
A supply bill arises in relation to transactions with Government and Public Sector
Undertakings. A party might have taken a contract for execution and he is entitled for
progress payment-based on work done, for which he has to submit bills in accordance with
the terms and conditions of the contract. Similarly, parties who have accepted tenders for
supply of goods are entitled for payments on the supply of goods for which they submit bills
in accordance with the terms of contract. These bills are known as 'Supply Bills'.
243
26.10.1 Procedure to be Followed in Respect of Supply Bills
 The supplier sends the goods and then produces documents like railway receipt or bill
of lading as evidence of the dispatch of goods. These' goods must be inspected by an
appropriate authority and the supplier should obtain an inspection note. In the case of
contracts, obtaining an engineer's certificate regarding the work done is required.
 The supplier or the contractor, as the case may be, prepares the bill for obtaining
payment. Government departments take quite sometime to verify the bills and pass them for
payment. Therefore, the supplier or contractor submits these bills together with the inspection
note or engineer's certificate to the appropriate Government department through the banker
and requests the banker for a requsite advance against such bills. The railway receipt is sent
direct to the department, but the number and other particulars of the railway receipt are
entered in the supply bills.
 It must be noted that these bills do not enjoy the status of negotiable instruments.
They are in the nature of debts, which can be assigned in favour of the banker for payment,
after affixing a revenue stamp for having received the amount. The banker should also obtain
a letter from the supplier or contractor requesting the appropriate department to make the
payment direct to the banker.
 26.10.2 Risks Involved in Advancing against Supply Bills
 Although the advance is self-liquidating in nature, in certain cases it can take quite a
long time before the advance is realised because of the administrative and other
Governmental procedures. It is virtually a clean advance and the bank may not realise the full
amount, because of the possibility of counter claim or the right of set-off by the Government
Department, as the charge is only by way of an assignment. Sometimes the Government may
not pass the bills for full amount because of the unsatisfactory quality of goods or defective
work done by the contractor or delay in completion of the work.
 26.10.3 Precautions to be taken by the Banker
 Advance against supply bills can be made only to borrowers who have sufficient
experience in Government business and Government regulations.
 The contract between the supplier and Government Department should be scrutinised
by the banker so as to know the volume of transaction, period of supply, rates agreed upon
and other terms and conditions. The Government will not pass the bills unless there is faithful
adherence to the terms and conditions by the supplier.
 The banker should obtain an irrevocable power of attorney form the supplier
favouring the banker to receive the money. The same should be registered with the
appropriate Government Department.
 The banker should obtain the inspection note or the engineer's certificate along with
the bills. There should be no adverse remarks on the inspection report regarding the quality
and quantity of the goods.
 There are two types of bills that are usually given by the suppliers. They are:
 Interim bills against which the Government pays 80-85 per cent of the amount
 Final bill for the balance of 15-20 per cent, that will be paid after complete
verification of goods at
the point of destination. Because of the delay involved in the settlement of final bills, banks
should prefer the interim bill for advancing and the final bill for collection.
Banker must reserve the right of demanding the repayment of advance, if the bills remain
unpaid for a specific period.
244
26.11 LET US SUM UP
Bankers take different types of securities for safeguarding their advances. Each type of
security contains its own features. The method of creation of a charge on these securities
varies according to the type. This unit explains the basic features of the securities that the
banker resorts to.
26.12 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS
1. The nature of charge created while advancing against LIC policies is
(a) Assignment (b) Lien
(c) Pledge (d) Set-off
2. Documents of title to goods has been defined in
(a) Indian Contract Act (b) Negotiable Instruments Act
(c) Transfer of Property Act (d) Sale of Goods Act.
3. In the terms of Section 19(2) of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, 'no banking
company shall hold shares in any company, whether as pledgee, mortgagee or absolute
owner, of an amount exceeding thirty per cent of the paid-up share capital of that company or
thirty per cent of its ----- , whichever is less'. Shares held in a demat form should also be
included for the purposes of determining the exposure limit.
(a) own paid up share capital and reserves
(b) tangible net worth
(c) risk weighted assets
(d) paid-up capital
4. Loans against the security of shares, debentures and PSU bonds to individuals should
not exceed the limit ofper individual borrower, if the securities are held in the demat form.
(a) Rs. 10 lakh(b) Rs. 15 lakh
(c) Rs. 20 lakh(d) Rs. 50 lakh
5. Loan against minor's term deposit
(a) can be granted if the documents are signed if the minor has completed the age of 14
years
(b) cannot be granted under any circumstances as the minor does not have the contractual
capacity
(c) can be granted to the guardian of the minor, if it is for the necessities of the minor
(d) can be granted only with the permission of the Court.
26.13 ANSWERS TO CHECK YOUR PROGRESS'
1. (a), 2. (d), 3. (a), 4. (c), 5. (c).
26.14 KEYWORDS
Immovable property, Goods, Inspection of goods, Documents of title to goods, Trust Receipt,
Shares, Book debts, Supply bills, Guarantee, Principal Debtor, Right of subrogation.
UNIT
27NON-PERFORMING ASSETS
(Prudential Norms on Income Recognition, Asset Classification and Provisioning, pertaining
to Advances)
STRUCTURE
27.0 Objectives
27.1 Introduction
27.2 Definition
27.2.1 Non-Performing Assets (NPA)
27.2.2 'Out of Order' Status
27.2.3 Overdue
27.3 Income Recognition
27.3.1 Income Recognition - Policy
27.3.2 Reversal of Income
27.3.3 Appropriation of Recovery in NPAs
27.3.4 Interest Application
27.3.5 Reporting of NPAs
27.4 Asset Classification
27.4.1 Categories of NPAs
27.4.2 Guidelines for Classification of Assets
27.5 Provisioning Norms
27.5.1 Loss Assets
27.5.2 Doubtful Assets
27.5.3 Substandard Assets
27.5.4 Standard Assets
27.5.5 Advances Covered by ECGC Guarantee
27.5.6 Advance Covered by DICGC Guarantee
27.6
27.7
27.8
27.9
27.5.7 Provisioning for Country Risk
Let Us Sum Up
Check Your Progress
Answers to 'Check Your Progress'
Keywords
246
27.0 OBJECTIVES
A study of this unit will help the learner to know the guidelines on classification of assets,
income recognition and provisioning norms.
27.1 INTRODUCTION
In line with international practices and as per the recommendations made by the 'Committee
on the Financial System' (Chairman Shri M. Narasimham), the Reserve Bank of India has
introduced, in a phased manner, prudential norms for income recognition, asset classification
and provisioning for the advances portfolio of the banks, to move towards greater consistency
and transparency in the published accounts.
The policy of income recognition should be objective and based on record of recovery rather
than on any subjective considerations. Likewise, the classification of assets of banks should
be done based on a objective criteria, which would ensure an uniform and consistent
application of the norms. In addition, the provisioning should be made based on the
classification of assets based on the period for which the asset has remained non-performing
and the availability of security and the realisable value thereof. Banks are to ensure that,
while granting loans and advances, realistic repayment schedules fixed, based on cash flows
of the borrowers. This would gc, a Jong way to facilitate prompt repayment by the borrowers
and thus improve the record of recovery in advances.
27.2 DEFINITION
27.2.1 Non-Performing Assets (NPA)
An asset. including a leased asset, becomes an NPA when it ceases to generate income for the
bank. An NPA is a loan or an advance where;
(i) the interest and/or instalment of principal remain overdue for a period nfmore than ninety
days in respect of a term loan.
(ii) an account remains 'out of order' as indicated in the paragraph below, in respect of an
overdraft/ cash credit (OD/CC),
(iii) a bill remains overdue for a period of more than ninety days, in the case of bills
purchased and discounted,
(iv) an instalment of the principal or the interest thereon remains overdue for two crop
seasons for short duration crops,
(v) an instalment of the principal or the interest thereon remains overdue for one crop season
for long duration crops.
Banks should classify an account as an NPA only if the interest charged during any quarter is
not serviced fully within ninety days from the end of the quarter.
27.2.2 'Out of Order' Status
An account treated as 'out of order', if the outstanding balance remains continuously in excess
of the sanctioned limit/drawing power. In cases, where the outstanding balance in the
operating account is less than the sanctioned limit/drawing power, but there are no credits
continuously for ninety days as on the date of balance sheet or credits are not enough to cover
the interest debited during the same period, these accounts should be treated as 'out of order'.
27.2.3 Overdue
Any amount due to the bank under any credit facility is 'overdue' if it is not paid on the due
date fixed by the bank.
247
27.3 INCOME RECOGNITION
27.3.1 Income Recognition – Policy
The policy of income recognition has to be objective and based on the record of recovery.
Internationally, income is not recognised from an NPA on an accrual basis, but is booked as
income only when it is actually received. Therefore, the banks should not charge and take to
the income account, interest on any NPA.
However, interest on advances against term deposits, NSCs, IVPs, KVPs and Life policies are
taken to the income account on the due date, provided adequate margin is available in the
accounts.
Fees and commissions earned by the banks because of renegotiations or rescheduling of
outstanding debts should be recognised on an accrual basis over the period of time covered
by the renegotiated or rescheduled extension of credit.
If Government guaranteed advances become an NPA, the interest on such advances should
not be taken to income account unless the interest has been realised.
27.3.2 Reversal of Income
If any advance, including bills purchased and discounted, becomes an NPA at the close of any
year, the interest accrued and credited to income account in the corresponding previous year,
should be reversed or provided for if the same is not realised. This will apply to Government
guaranteed accounts also.
In respect of NPAs, fees, commission and similar income that have accrued will cease to
accrue in the current period and reversed or provided for, with respect to past periods, if
uncollected.
Leased Assets
The finance charge component of finance income [as defined in 'AS 19-Leases' issued by the
Council of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI)] on the leased asset which
has accrued and was credited to income account before the asset became non-performing, and
remaining unrealised, should be reversed or provided for in the current accounting period.
27.3.3 Appropriation of Recovery in NPAs
Interest realised on NPAs taken to income account, provided the credits in the accounts
towards interest are not out of fresh/ additional credit facilities sanctioned to the borrower
concerned.
In the absence of a clear agreement between the bank and the borrower for the purpose of
appropriation of recoveries in NPAs (i.e. towards principal or interest due), banks should
adopt an accounting principle and exercise the right of appropriation of recoveries in a
uniform and consistent manner.
27.3.4 Interest Application
There is no objection to the banks using their own discretion in debiting interest to an NPA
account taking the same to the interest suspense account or maintaining only a record of such
interest in proforma accounts.
27.3.5 Reporting of NPAs
Banks are required to furnish a report on NPAs as on 31 March each year, after completion of
audit. The NPAs would relate to the banks' global portfolio, including the advances at the
foreign branches.
While reporting NPA figures to RBI, the amount held in interest suspense account, is to be
shown as a deduction from the gross NPAs as well as the gross advances
248
non-performing advance accounts may furnish the amount of interest receivable on NPAs as a
footnote to the report.
Whenever NPAs are reported to RBI, the amount of technical write off, if any, should be
reduced from the outstanding gross advances and gross NPAs to eliminate any distortion in
the quantum of NPAs being reported.
27.4 ASSET CLASSIFICATION
27.4.1 Categories of NPAs
Banks are required to classify non-performing assets into the following three categories based
on the period for which the asset has remained non-performing and the readability of the
dues:
(a) Substandard Assets (b) Doubtful Assets (c) Loss Assets
Substandard Assets
With effect from 31 March, 2005, a substandard asset would be one, which has remained a
NPA for a period less than or equal to twelve months.
Doubtful Assets
With effect from 31 March, 2005, an asset would be classified as doubtful if it has remained
in the substandard category for a period of twelve months.
Loss Assets
A loss asset is one, where the bank or the internal or external auditors or the RBI inspection
has identified the loss but the amount has not been written off wholly. In other words, such an
asset is considered uncollectible and of such little value that its continuance as a bankable
asset is not warranted although there may be some salvage or recovery value.
27.4.2 Guidelines for Classification of Assets
Accounts with Temporary Deficiencies
The classification of an asset as NPA should be based on the record of recovery. Bank should
not classify an advance account as NPA merely due to the existence of some deficiencies
which are temporary in nature such as non-availability of adequate drawing power based on
the latest available stock statement, balance outstanding exceeding the limit temporarily, non-
submission of stock statements and non-renewal of the limits on the due date, etc. In the
matter of classification of accounts with such deficiencies, banks may follow the following
guidelines:
(a) Banks should ensure that drawings in the working capital accounts are covered by the
adequacy of
current assets, since current assets are first appropriated in times of distress. Drawing power
is
required to be arrived at based on the stock statement, which is current. However, considering
the
difficulties of large borrowers, stock statements relied upon by the banks for determining
drawing
power should not be older than three months. The outstanding in the account based on
drawing
power calculated from stock statements older than three months, would be deemed as
irregular. A
working capital borrowal account will become an NPA if such irregular drawings are
permitted in
the account for a continuous period of ninety days even though the unit may be working or
the
borrower's financial position is satisfactory.
(b) Regular and ad hoc credit limits need to be reviewed/regularised not later than three
months from
the due date/date of the ad hoc sanction. In case of constraints such as non-availability of
financial
statements and other data from the borrowers, the branch should furnish evidence to show
that
249
renewal/review of credit limits is already on and would be completed soon. In any case, a
delay beyond six months is not considered desirable as a general discipline. Hence, an
account where the regular/ad hoc credit limits have not been reviewed/renewed within 180
days from the due date/ date of ad hoc sanction, will be treated as NPA.
Upgradation of Loan Accounts Classified as NPAs
If arrears of the interest and the principal are paid by the borrower, in the case of loan
accounts classified as NPAs, the account should no longer be treated as non-performing and
may be classified as 'standard' accounts.
Asset Classification to be Borrowerwise and not Facilitywise
(i) It is difficult to envisage a situation when only one facility to a borrower/one investment in
any of the securities issued by the borrower becomes a problem credit/investment and not
others. Therefore, all the facilities granted by a bank to a borrower and investment in all the
securities issued by the borrower will have to be treated as NPA and not the particular
facility/investment or part thereof which has become irregular.
(ii) If the debits arising out of devolvement of letters of credit or invoked guarantees are in a
separate account, the balance outstanding in that account also should be treated as a part of
the borrower's principal operating account for the purpose of application of prudential norms
on income recognition, asset classification and provisioning.
Advances under Consortium Arrangements
Asset classification of accounts under consortium should be based on the record of recovery
of the individual member banks and other aspects that have a bearing on the recoverability of
the advances.
Accounts where there is Erosion in the Value of Security due to Frauds Committed by
Borrowers
In respect of accounts where there are potential threats for recovery, because of erosion in the
value of security or non-availability of security, the existence of other factors such as frauds
committed by borrowers, it will not be prudent that such accounts should go through various
stages of asset classification. In cases of such serious credit impairment, the asset should be
straightaway classified as doubtful or loss asset as appropriate.
(i) Erosion in the value of a security can be reckoned as significant, when the realisable value
of the security is less than fifty per cent of the value, assessed by the bank or accepted by RBI
at the time of last inspection, as the case may be. Such NPAs come under the doubtful
category classification and provisioning, as applicable, for the doubtful assets is required
straightaway.
(ii) If the realisable value of the security, as assessed by the bank/approved valuers/RBI is
less than ten per cent of the outstanding in the bbrrowal accounts, the existence of security
should be ignored and the asset should be straightaway classified as a loss asset. It may either
be written off or fully provided for, by the bank.
Advances against Term Deposits, NSCs, KVP/IVP, etc.
Advances against term deposits, NSCs eligible for surrender, IVPs, KVPs and life policies
need not be treated as NPAs. Advances against gold ornaments, government securities and all
other securities are not covered by this exemption.
Loans with Moratorium for Payment of Interest
(i) In the case of bank finance given for industrial projects or for agricultural plantations, etc.,
where
250
a moratorium is available for the payment of interest, then it becomes "due' only after the
moratorium or gestation period is over. Therefore, such amounts of interest do not become
overdue and hence do not become an NPA, with reference to the date of debit of interest.
They become overdue after the due date for payment of interest, if uncollected.
(ii) In case of a housing loan or similar advances granted to staff members where interest is
payable after the recovery of principal, interest need not be considered as overdue from the
first quarter onwards. Such loans/advances should be classified as NPA only when there is a
default in repayment of instalment of principal or payment of interest, on the respective due
dates.
Agricultural Advances
(i) A loan granted for short duration crops is treated as NPA, if the instalment of principal or
interest thereon remains overdue for two crop seasons. A loan granted for long duration crops
is treated as NPA only if the instalment of principal or interest thereon remains overdue for
one crop season. For the purpose of these guidelines, 'long duration' crops would be crops
with a crop season longer than one year and crops, which are not 'long duration' crops, would
be treated as 'short duration' crops. The crop season for each crop, which means the period up
to harvesting of the crops raised, would be as determined by the State Level Bankers'
Committee in each State. Depending upon the duration of crops raised by an agriculturist, the
above NPA norms also made applicable to the agricultural term loans availed of by him. The
above norms are made applicable to all direct agricultural advances. In respect of agricultural
loans, other than those specified and the term loans given to non-agriculturists, identification
of NPAs would be done on the same basis as for non-agricultural advances which, at present,
is the ninety-days delinquency norm.
(ii) Where natural calamities impair the repaying capacity of agricultural borrowers, banks
may decide on their own, as a relief measure, conversion of the short term production loan
into a term loan or a rescheduling of the repayment period or the sanction of a fresh short-
term loan.
(iii) In such cases of conversion or rescheduling, the term loan as well as the fresh short-term
loan are treated as current dues and need not be classified as NPA. The asset classification of
these loans would thereafter be governed by the revised terms and conditions and would be
treated as NPA if the interest and/or instalment of principal remains overdue for two crop
seasons for short duration crops and for one crop season for long duration crops.
(iv) While fixing the repayment schedule in the case of rural housing advances granted to
agriculturists under the 'Indira Awas Yojana' and 'Golden Jubilee Rural Housing Finance
Scheme', banks should ensure that the interest/instalment payable on such advances are
linked to crop cycles.
Government Guaranteed Advances
The credit facilities backed by guarantee of the Central Government, though overdue, may be
treated as an NPA only, when the Government repudiates its guarantee when invoked. This
exemption from classification of Government guaranteed advances as NPA is not for the
purpose of recognition of income. The requirement of invocation of guarantee was delinked
for deciding the asset classification and provisioning requirements in respect of State
Government guaranteed exposures. With effect from the year ending 31 March, 2006, State
Government guaranteed advances and investments in State Government guaranteed securities
would attract asset classification and provisioning norms if interest and/or principal or any
other amount due to the bank remains overdue for more than ninety days.
Upgradation of Restructured Accounts
The substandard accounts which have been subjected to restructuring, etc., whether in respect
of principal instalment or interest amount, by whatever modality, would be eligible for
upgrading to the standard
251
category, only after the specified period, i.e. a period of one year after the date when the first
payment of interest or of principal, whichever is earlier, falls due, subject to satisfactory
performance during the period. The amount of provision made earlier, net of the amount
provided for the sacrifice in the interest amount in present value terms as aforesaid, could
also be reversed after the one-year period. During this one-year period, the substandard asset
will not deteriorate in its classification if satisfactory performance of the account is
demonstrated during the period. In case, however, the satisfactory performance during the
one-year period is not evident, the asset classification of the restructured account would be
governed as per the applicable prudential norms with reference to the pre-restructuring
payment schedule.
27.5 PROVISIONING NORMS
Banks should make provisions against substandard assets, doubtful assets and loss assets as
below:
27.5.1 Loss Assets
Loss assets should be written off. If loss assets are permitted to remain in the books for any
reason, 100 per cent of the outstanding should be provided for.
27.5.2 Doubtful Assets
(i) Hundred per cent of the extent to which the advance is not covered by the realisable value
of the security to which the bank has a valid recourse and the realisable value is estimated on
a realistic basis.
(ii) In regard to the secured portion, provision may be made on the following basis, at the
rates ranging from twenty per cent to hundred per cent of the secured portion depending upon
the period for which the asset has remained doubtful.
TABLE 27.1 Provisioning Norms for Assets
Period for which the advance has remained in 'doubtful' category
Up to one year
One to three years
More than three years
(i) outstanding stock of NPAs as on March 31, 2004
(ii) advances classified as 'doubtful more than three years' on or after April 1, 2004
Provision requirement (in %)
20 per cent 30 per cent
- 60 per cent with effect from March 31, 2005
- 75 per cent with effect from March 31, 2006
- 100 per cent with effect from March 31, 2007
-
100 per cent with effect from March 31, 2005
27.5.3 Substandard Assets
A general provision of ten per cent on total outstanding should be made without making any
allowance for ECGC guarantee cover and securities available. The unsecured exposures,
which are identified as 'substandard' would attract additional provision of ten per cent, i.e. a
total of twenty per cent on the outstanding balance. The provisioning requirement for
unsecured 'doubtful' assets is 100 per cent. Unsecured exposure is defined as an exposure
where the realisable value of the security, as assessed by the bank/approved valuers/Reserve
Bank's inspecting officers, is not more than ten per cent, ab initio, of the outstanding
exposure. 'Exposure' shall include all funded and non-funded exposures (including
underwriting and similar commitments). 'Security' will mean tangible security properly
discharged to the bank and will not include intangible securities like guarantees, comfort
letters, etc.
252
27.5.4 Standard Assets
(i) Banks should make general provisions for standard assets at the following rates for the
funded outstanding on global loan portfolio basis:
(a) direct advances to agricultural and SME sectors at 0.25 per cent;
(b) advances to specific sectors, i.e. personal loans, loans and advances qualifying as
capital market exposures, residential housing loans beyond Rs. 20 lakh and commercial real
estate loans at one per cent;
(c) all other advances not included in (a) and (b) at 0.40 per cent.
(ii) As regards the additional facilities sanctioned as per the package finalised by BIFR and/or
term lending institutions, provision on additional facilities sanctioned need not be made for a
period of one year from the date of disbursement.
Advances against term deposits, NSCs eligible for surrender, IVPs, KVPs, and life policies
would attract provisioning requirements as applicable to their asset classification status.
However, advances against gold ornaments, government securities and all other kinds of
securities are not exempted from provisioning requirements.
27.5.5 Advances Covered by ECGC Guarantee
In the case of advances classified as doubtful and guaranteed by ECGC, provision should be
made only for the balance in excess of the amount guaranteed by the corporation. Further,
while arriving at the provisions required for doubtful assets, realisable value of the securities
must first be deducted from the outstanding balance in respect of the amount guaranteed by
the corporation and then provision made.
27.5.6 Advance Covered by DICGC Guarantee
In case of advances covered by DICGC guarantee become non-performing, no provision
needs to be made towards the guaranteed portion. The amount outstanding in excess of the
guaranteed portion should be provided for, as per the extant guidelines on provisioning for
non-performing advances.
27.5.7 Provisioning for Country Risk
Banks shall make provisions, with effect from the year ending 31 March, 2003, on the net
funded country exposures on a graded scale ranging from 0.25 to 100 per cent according to
the risk categories mentioned below. To begin with, banks shall make provisions as per the
ECGC risk classification.
27.6 LET US SUM UP
In this unit, we learnt what are non-performing assets, when a loan account is classified as
NPA, the policy on income recognition, norms for classification of non-performing assets in
to substandard, doubtful and loss assets and also provisioning requirements of various
categories of advances. An asset becomes a non-performing assert when it ceases to generate
income for the bank. The policy of income recognition is based on the record of recovery.
Non-performing assets are classified into three categories based on the period for which they
remained in non-performing category. The quantum of provisions made depends upon the
category of assets such as standard, substandard, doubtful and loss.
27.7 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS
1. When will a loan be NPA?
(a) Interest and/or loan instalments overdue for more than 90 days.
(b) A/c is out of order for more than 90 days in case of overdraft/cash credit
253
(c) Bill remains overdue for more than 90 days in BP/BD
(d) All of the above
(e) Only (a) and (c)
2. Charging of interest at monthly rests would/would not change overdues under NPA.
(a) Would make overdue of 90 days from monthly interest debiting
(b) Would make overdue 90 days from previous quarter ending
(c) Both of above.
(d) None of above.
3. Direct advances to agriculture and SME under standard assets category requires
provision at the rate of
(a) 0.40 per cent (b) 0.10 per cent
(c) 1.00 per cent (d) 0.25 per cent
4. A substandard asset is one which has remained NPA for a period less than or equal to
(a) 12 months(b) 6 months
(c) 90 days (d) 180 days
27.8 ANSWERS TO CHECK YOUR PROGRESS'
1. (d), 2. (b), 3. (d), 4. (a).
27.9 KEYWORDS
Non-performing Assets, Standard Assets, Substandard Assets, Loss Assets, Provisioning,
Upgradation of NPA.
UNIT
28
FINANCIAL INCLUSION
28.0 Objectives
28.1 Introduction
28.2 Financial Inclusion by Extension of Banking Services
28.2.1 Use of Business Facilitators and Correspondents
28.2.2 Other Terms and Conditions for Engagement of Business Facilitators
and Correspondents
28.3 Financial Literacy
28.4 Let Us Sum Up
28.5 Check Your Progress
28.6 Answers to 'Check Your Progress'
28.7 Keywords
256
28.0 OBJECTIVES
This unit will help the learner to understand the financial inclusion and its role in rural
development.
28.1 INTRODUCTION
By financial inclusion, we mean the provision of affordable financial services, viz., access to
payments and remittance facilities, savings, loans and insurance services by the formal
financial system to those who tend to be excluded. It is important to recognise that, in the
policy framework for development of the formal financial system in India, the need for
financial inclusion covering more and more of the excluded population by the formal
financial system has always been consciously emphasised. Even after decades of such
emphasis, there are large segments of the society outside the financial system.
Simultaneously, the growth of the NGO and the self-help groups has been significant and
their linkage with banks has facilitated a greater financial inclusion. The SHG movement in
India has enabled social and economic inclusion of women. The SHG-bank linkage
movement, where SHGs are linked to banks in a gradual way - initially through savings and
later through loan products, has been able to ensure financial inclusion to a certain extent.
The formal financial system has to recognise the huge business potential coming from the
unmet demand for financial services from those who normally tend to be excluded. The focus
on financial inclusion comes from the recognition that financial inclusion has several
externalities, which can be exploited to the mutual advantage of those excluded, the banking
system and society at large. Banks need to understand the markets and develop products
suited to the clientele. They need to develop data sets to evolve risk assessment models for
proper rating and pricing. Financial inclusion has to be viewed as a business strategy for
growth and banks need to position themselves accordingly.
The Reserve Bank of India has continued to lay stress on the need for financial inclusion of
the under privileged sections, which have hitherto remained outside the periphery of the
banking system. In many banks, the minimum balance requirement and charges levied,
although accompanied by a number of free facilities, deter a sizeable section of population
from opening/maintaining bank accounts.
As a proactive measure, the RBI in its annual policy statement for the year 2005-06, while
recognising the concerns in regard to the banking practices that tend to exclude, rather than
attract vast sections of population, urged banks to review their existing practices to align them
with the objective of financial inclusion. In the mid-term review of the policy (2005-06), the
RBI exhorted the banks, with a view to achieving greater financial inclusion, to make
available, a basic banking 'no frills' account, either with nil or very minimum balances as well
as charges that would make such accounts accessible to vast sections of the population. The
nature and number of transactions in such accounts would be restricted and made known to
customers in advance in a transparent manner.
Further, in order to ensure that persons belonging to the low income group, both in the urban
and rural areas, do not face difficulty in opening the bank accounts due to the procedural
hassles, the KYC procedure for opening accounts has been simplified for those persons with
balances not exceeding rupees fifty thousand (Rs. 50,000) and credits in the accounts not
exceeding rupees one lakh (Rs. 1,00,000) in a year.
RRBs have been specifically advised to allow limited overdraft facilities in the 'no frills'
accounts without any collateral or linkage to any purpose. The idea is that a provision of such
overdraft facility provides a ready source of funding to the account holder, who is thereby
induced to open such accounts.
257
28.2 FINANCIAL INCLUSION BY EXTENSION OF BANKING SERVICES
28.2.1 Use of Business Facilitators and Correspondents
With the objective of ensuring a greater financial inclusion and increasing the outreach of the
banking sector, the RBI has decided to enable banks to use the services of NGOs/SHGs,
micro-finance institutions (MFLs) and other civil society organisations (CSOs) as
intermediaries in providing financial and banking services through the use of business
facilitator and correspondent models as indicated below.
Business Facilitator Model: Eligible Entities and Scope of Activities
Under the 'Business Facilitator' model, banks may use intermediaries, such as NGOs/farmers'
Clubs, cooperatives, community-based organisations, IT enabled rural outlets of corporate
entities, postoffices, insurance agents, well functioning Panchayats, village knowledge
centres, agri clinics/agri business centers, Krishi Vigyan Kendras and KVIC/KVIB units,
depending on the comfort level of the bank, for providing facilitation services. Such services
may include:
(a) identification of borrowers and fitment of activities;
(b) collection and preliminary processing of loan applications including verification of
primary information/data;
(c) creating awareness about savings and other products and education and advice on
managing money and debt counselling;
(d) processing and submission of applications to banks;
(e) promotion and nurturing self-help groups/joint liability groups;
(f) post-sanction monitoring;
(g) monitoring and hand holding of self-help groups/joint liability groups/credit
groups/others;
(h) follow-up for recovery.
As these services are not intended to involve the conduct of banking business by business
facilitators, no approval is required from RBI for using the above intermediaries for
facilitation of the services indicated above.
Business Correspondent Model: Eligible Entities and Scope of Activities
Under the 'Business Correspondent' model, NGOs/MFIs set up under the Societies/Trust
Acts, societies registered under the Mutually Aided Cooperative Societies Acts or the
Cooperative Societies Acts of States, registered NBFCs not accepting public deposits and
postoffices may act as business correspondents. In engaging such intermediaries as business
correspondents, banks should ensure that they are well established, enjoying a good
reputation and having the confidence of the local people. Banks may give wide publicity in
the locality about the intermediary engaged by them as business correspondent and take
measures to avoid being misrepresented.
In addition to activities listed under the business facilitator model, the scope of activities to be
undertaken by the business correspondents will include:
(a) disbursal of small value credit;
(b) recovery of principal/collection of interest;
(c) collection of small value deposits;
(d) sale of micro-insurance/mutual fund products/pension products/other third party
products;
(e) receipt and delivery of small value remittances/other payment instruments.
The activities undertaken by the business correspondents would be within the normal course
of the bank's banking business, but conducted, through the entities indicated above at places
other than the bank premises.
258
Accordingly, in furtherance of the objective of increasing the outreach of the banks for micro-
finance, in the public interest, the Reserve Bank hereby permits banks to formulate a scheme
for using the entities indicated above as business correspondents.
Payment of commission/fees for engagement of business facilitators/correspondents: Banks
may pay a reasonable commission/fee to the business facilitators/correspondents, the rate and
quantum of which may be reviewed periodically. The agreement with the business
facilitators/correspondents should specifically prohibit them from charging any fee from the
customers directly for services rendered by them on behalf of the bank.
28.2.2 Other Terms and Conditions for Engagement of Business Facilitators and
Correspondents
As the engagement of intermediaries as business facilitators/correspondents involves a
significant reputational, legal and operational risks, due consideration should be given by
banks to those risks. They should also endeavour to adopt technology-based solutions for
managing the risk, besides increasing the outreach in a cost effective manner.
The arrangements with the business correspondents shall specify the following:
(a) Suitable limits on cash holding by intermediaries, as also limits on individual
customer payments and receipts.
(b) The requirement that the transactions are accounted for and reflected in the bank's
books by end of day or next working day.
(c) All agreements/contracts with the customer shall clearly specify that the bank is
responsible to the customer for acts of omission and commission of the business
facilitator/correspondent.
Redressal of grievances in regard to services rendered by business facilitators/correspondents.
(a) Banks should constitute a grievance redressal machinery within the bank for
redressing complaints about services rendered by business correspondents and facilitators and
give wide publicity about it through electronic and print media. The name and contact
number of designated grievance redressal officer of the bank should be made known and
widely publicised. The designated officer should ensure that genuine grievances of customers
get redressed promptly.
(b) The grievance redressal procedure of the bank and the time frame fixed for
responding to the complaints should be placed on the bank's website.
(c) If a complainant does not get satisfactory response from the bank within 60 days from
the date of his lodging the compliant, he will have the option to approach the office of the
Banking Ombudsman concerned for redressal of his grievance/s.
Compliance with KYC norms will continue to be the responsibility of banks. Since the
objective is to extend savings and loa facilities to the underprivileged and unrepresented
population, banks may adopt a flexible approach within the parameters of guidelines issued
on KYC from time to time.
In addition to introduction from any person on whom KYC has been done, banks can also
rely on certificates of identification issued by the intermediary being used as banking
correspondent, block development officer (BDO), head of village Panchayat, postmaster of
the post office concerned or any other public functionary, known to the bank.
28.3 FINANCIAL LITERACY
Financial Literacy is the process by which people improve their knowledge and
understanding of the use of financial products and services. It is also described as one's
ability to make informed judgements and to take effective decisions regarding the use and the
management of money.
259
The financial literacy is promoted by the provision of financial education and is a prelude to
financial inclusion in villages. Financial literacy, besides acquiring and/or acquainting with
the information on financial services through the process of financial education by an
individual, is a state of mind at which the individual is equipped with the skills necessary to
access resources to make him capable of dealing with financial intermediaries, like banks.
The delivery of financial education comprises of three key themes: building skills, increasing
knowledge and developing understanding and within each of these an individual's confidence
should also be developed, which alone will pave way for faster financial inclusion of the
hitherto excluded population in the rural areas. One of the aims of financial education is to
guide the rural population in management of existing debt and the exit methods.
28.4 LET US SUM UP
Financial Inclusion is a provision of affordable financial services, to those who tend to be
excluded. The RBI has continued to lay stress on the need for financial inclusion of the under
privileged sections, which have hitherto remained outside the periphery of the banking
system. The RBI has decided to enable the banks to use the services of non-governmental
organisations, etc., as intermediaries in providing the financial and banking services through
use of business facilitator and correspondent models. One of the objectives of this model is to
promote financial literacy through the provision of financial education. The delivery of
financial education in villages encompasses three key themes: building skills, increasing
knowledge and developing understanding and within each of these an individual's confidence
should also be developed, which alone will make the hitherto excluded population in the rural
areas financially included.
28.5 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS
1. The scope of activities undertaken by the business correspondents will not include:
(a) disbursal of small value credit
(b) recovery of principal/collection of interest
(c) collection of small value deposits
(d) payment of money on demand drafts not exceeding Rs. 1,000
2. Bank cannot use the services of one of the following person/association/organisation
as
intermediaries in providing financial and banking services through the use of business
facilitator
and correspondent models
(a) non-governmental organizations (b) self-help groups (NGOs/SHGs)
(c) village sarpanch (d) Micro Finance Institutions (MFIs)
28.6 ANSWER TO 'CHECK YOUR PROGRESS'
1. (d), 2. (c).
28.7 KEYWORDS
Financial Inclusion, Business Facilitator, Business Correspondent.
MODULE -C
BANKING TECHNOLOGY
Unit 29. Essentials of Bank Computerisation
Unit 30. Payment Systems and Electronic Banking
Unit 31. Data Communication Network and EFT Systems
Unit 32. Role of Technology Upgradation and its Impact on Banks
Unit 33. Security Considerations
UNIT
29ESSENTIALS OF BANK COMPUTERISATION
STRUCTURE
29.0 Objectives
29.1 Introduction
29.2 Bank Computerisation
29.2.1 Need for Computerisation
29.2.2 Stand-alone Computer System
29.2.3 Multi-user Systems
29.3 LANs and WANs
29.3.1 Local Area Network (LAN)
29.3.2 Topology (Layout)
29.3.3 Protocols
29.3.4 Wide Area Network (WAN)
29.4 Uninterrupted Power System (UPS)
29.5 Core Banking
29.5.1 Business Components
29.5.2 Benefits
29.5.3 Essential Requirements
29.6 Let Us Sum Up
29.7 Check Your Progress
29.8 Answers to 'Check Your Progress'
29.9 Keywords
264
29.0 OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit, you should be able to:
• know different approaches to Bank Computerisation
• classify the networking and processing concepts
• explain the types of computer networking and understand the UPS.
29.1 INTRODUCTION
The wind of liberalisation sweeping through India has affected all sectors of the economy and
the centre of all these activities is the Indian Banking Industry. In such a fast-changing
environment, to meet emerging needs, the operations in banks need immediate automation to
provide services comparable to best international standards and to match technological
changes taking place in other countries.
Indian Banks undertook very little efforts for modernisation in respect of work technologies
particularly in the areas of introduction of computers and communication networks until the
early 1980s.
Prior to 1983 (when the agreements with unions on computerisation was signed), most of the
banks, being practically unable to computerise, had taken a passive view of this issue
resulting in automation taking a very low priority. However, the new agreement reversed this
trend and banks started the process of computerising operations at various levels.
Only after 1983 and after the first report of 'Rangarajan Committee' were there brisk activities
in order to bring quick technological changes in the field of computers and communications.
29.2 BANK COMPUTERISATION
The concept of Bank Computerisation practically started after 1980-81 and more precisely
gained pace in the year 1983-84, after setting up a committee in the year 1983 under the
chairmanship of the then Deputy Governor of RBI, Dr. C. Rangarajan. This Committee was
set up to study the possibilities and stages involved in bank computerisation and to prepare
guidelines for the same. The report submitted by the committee in the year 1984 was known
as First Rangarajan Committee Report on bank mechanisation.
Another Committee was constituted in 1988 under the chairmanship of Dr. C. Rangarajan to
draw up a perspective plan on computerisation of banks for a five year period 1990-94.
29.2.1 Need for Computerisation
The four major objectives of computerisation in banking are to improve:
(a) customer service (b) housekeeping
(c) decision-making (d) productivity and profitability.
A question, often raised, is whether in order to achieve these objectives, computerisation is at
all necessary. Speed and accuracy are the hallmarks of computers. Computers have a vital
role to play wherever there is a huge volume of transactions and the work needs completion
within a specified period. Consumers today are becoming more discerning and demanding.
There is a price on their time and therefore, when they visit a branch for a deposit or a cheque
encashment, they are looking for a quick settlement of their transactions. Thus, the
advantages flowing from computerisation are many and most people working in the banking
industry recognise it.
The main objectives of computerisation at the branch level should be to improve customer
service, quality of housekeeping and generation of data for better management control. At the
regional and head
265
office levels, the purpose of computerisation should be to store, analyse and retrieve data
received from branches, generating information speedily, thereby strengthening the internal
control over branches for policy formulation.
29.2.2 Stand-alone Computer System
The stand-alone computer system is normally the initial stage of computerisation at a bank.
The single user computer system is a small system, which as its name implies, is used by only
one person at a time.
Stand-alone systems are best suited for the decision-making process, which involves
processing and analysis of data. The managers, executives who are responsible for making
managerial decisions benefit from such systems. The stand-alone systems cannot be used in a
multi-user environment, but these systems can be easily connected to the existing multi-user
systems to access corporate database and other shared information and resources. Normally
in such cases a stand-alone system is called a workstation or a node. Today's stand-alone
systems are also capable of handling multimedia, high-quality graphics, fax messages, etc.
The major advantages of installing single-user systems are numerous, such as low equipment
cost, no complicated software required, easier to impart training to banking staff for operation
of these machines and better security. However, the single-user system has limitations such as
slow processing speed and low data storage capacity, and to its use by one person at a time
they are suitable only for front-office branch computerisation at bank branches with a low
workload.
29.2.3 Multi-user Systems
The multi-user systems, as their names signify, are computers on which several people can
work at the same time. Mini computers, Main Frame Computers, Micro-computers and the
more powerful Super Computers all fall under this category,
Multi-user Computer Networking
In such a system computers are based on the centralised processing concept. All information
is kept and processed at the main central machines and various terminals are attached to the
main computer. The main computer can store a huge amount of information and possesses
high-processing speeds enabling a large number of users to be connected to the main central
computer. Each user has his/her own terminal. Systems like Unix are used as operating
system. These systems work on a time-sharing basis and are well suited for the development
of online applications. Most of the banking systems are developed using the centralised
computing concept. This is due to the widespread popularity of the Unix system. Most of the
Relational Data Base Management Systems (RDBMSs) and other Data Base Management
Systems (DBMSs) use the Unix platform. In this approach, the terminals have limited powers
and cannot process the information locally. Whatever information required and processed is
through the central machine only. The load on the central machine increases with the increase
in the number of users.
In most of the computerised information systems, the data is processed at one EDP
department. The EDP department has to process large volumes of data everyday and a
considerable amount of infrastructure and maintenance is required.
The advantages of using a centralised data processing system are namely,
(a) availability of corporate level information at one location is possible
(b) cost of acquiring hardware, software and other infrastructure is more profitable than
acquiring the
same for individual departments
(c) due to the high volume of data processing the computing resources can be fully
utilised
(d) technical manpower can also be efficiently managed at a central level
266
(e) costly resources like leased telephone lines, satellite links, etc., can be shared among the
various departments
Branch-level Computerisation
The emphasis on branch-level computerisation is for two important reasons. First, customer
interface is at the maximum at the branch level. Increased use of computers and advanced
technology can lead to reductions in waiting time, accuracy in reporting statement of
accounts and expeditious transfer of funds. All these lead to improved customer service.
Second, the emphasis on online transactions processing at the branch level is because only if
the data is initially captured in the machines, further processing becomes speedier and easier.
Computerisation at the branch level can be used to:
(a) Provide better and speedy customer service
(b) Improve housekeeping services
(c) Analyse the branch-level data for decision making
(d) Generation of various reports.
The terminals or the PCs are connected together with a single powerful PC acting as a server.
Various productivity tools are utilised to analyse the branch-level data to make branch-level
policy decisions. Security measures play an important role in branch-level computerisation
because of online banking applications. Most of the security features are in-built in the
operating system and hardware themselves, such as use of password provision at different
levels, various access rights to system and data, locking facilities, etc. The provision of
features like disk mirroring, disk duplexing, transaction tracking systems, regular backups,
use of uninterrupted power supply, prevent failures and help in recovering from failures. The
generation of audit trails and exceptional transaction reports ensure proper functioning of the
computerised systems.
Total Branch Automation
With total branch computerisation, all the customer and business transactions are done with
the help of computers. This is a real time online banking. Whenever a transaction is entered
through a terminal, the transaction is recorded. Then it is verified and authenticated and all
corresponding updates are reflected instantly. The activities (independent modules) are
interlinked to form an integrated system such that changes are effected without a time lag.
Various security controls are enforced to ensure data integrity and security. Various outputs
such as ledger extracts, passbooks, vouchers, statements of accounts of customers, etc., are
generated online. By using total branch computerisation, it is possible to provide the 'single
window' transactions concept. That means a customer can approach any counter for
completing all his or her transactions, but the system should be capable of shifting from a
single window to a partial window and or universal window transactions depending upon the
customers' convenience and branch needs. EFT (Electronic Fund Transfer) can be used to
facilitate the automatic transmission and processing of messages and funds from one
branch/bank to another branch/bank. EFT at points of sale terminals allows transfer of funds
electronically and debit and credit the respective accounts. EFT system can be integrated with
an existing online system to automate and speed up the fund transfer process. Off-site ATMs
are also linked to the branch system to enable the customer to bank anytime/anywhere.
Software and hardware requirements depend upon the size of the branch.
Computerisation at Regional/Circle/Zonal Office
RO/ZO acts in between branches and the head office. They exercise effective control over the
functioning of the branches including collection of data from them and transmitting the same
to the head office after amalgamation. The most common tasks performed by the regional
office/zonal office are:
267
(a) branch profile, (b) inter-branch reconciliation, (c) credit monitoring, (d) personnel data
manage¬ment, etc.
Branch profiles: The Branch profile has two components:
(a) Fixed particulars - includes the (1) branch location details such as state, district, city,
etc. (2) the
type of premises, whether rental or owned, etc. (3) the area details like
metropolitan/urban/semi-
urban/rural, etc. (b) variable particulars include budgeted business volumes, actual
performance,
income and expenditure data, various statistical reports, etc.
(b) Inter-branch reconciliation: The manual matching of inter-branch transactions among
the branches
can be very difficult, being a time-consuming task but it can be done easily through
computerisation
at the ROs/ZOs. Another approach is to perform easily and expeditiously the branch-to-
branch
reconciliation at head office. The job of ROs/ZOs in this case is to collect the transactions
from
branches under their jurisdiction and transmit them to the head office for further processing.
(c) Credit monitoring: Monitoring of loans and advances is one of the major tasks of any
bank and this
task can be effectively decentralised to the regional/zonal authorities to have an effective
control
and supervision. This involves maintenance of a large database at ZO/RO of branches,
covering all
accounts and details of borrowers. This information helps ROs/ZOs to make decisions to plan
various budgetary provisions and policies.
(d) Personnel data management: This is the database containing the information about the
personnel
working within their region or zone. The personnel database may include information like
educational
qualifications, age, seniority details, various posts held, training programmes attended,
transfer
details and so on. This database can be analysed to decide manpower requirements, planning,
promotions, transfers, career planning, performance evaluation, etc.
Most of the ROs/ZOs of banks are equipped with minicomputers and Unix as an operating
system with Informix, Oracle, etc., as database back-ends and applications are either software
from different vendors or developed in-house using COBOL, C, BASIC, etc., languages.
Computerisation at Head Office Level: The head office of a bank is responsible for bank-
level planning, and control functions, policy decisions. The head office activities are divided
into different functional areas like:
(a) operations,(b) planning, (c) personnel,
(d) international business,(e) services, etc.
The computerisation at various functional areas may include application areas:
(a) personnel management and administrative support (b) funds management
(c) investment portfolio management(d) branch profiles
(e) credit information system, etc.
The information generated from various functional areas is important for the top management
to make various strategic decisions.
(a) Personnel management and administrative support: The database containing details of
employees of the bank is kept at the head office. This database can be decentralised and can
be kept at the ZOs/ROs. The administrative support may include computerisation of various
office activities, for example, pay rolls, which includes calculation of the monthly salaries,
printing of pay sheets/slips, generation of various salary reports, recovery reports,
management of provident fund, loans and advances to employees, etc., the banks should limit
their balances with RBI and investments in Government securities to the minimum stipulated
in the regulations. The fund management task is very complicated due to day-to-day
variations in withdrawals and deposits. The quick and accurate information about the
advances and deposits from the branches enables the head office to manage
268
the funds effectively. Most of the time, it happens that few branches account for large portion
of day-to-day variations. The communication network connecting such branches to the head
office computer plays a very important role in providing online information about the
business position of such branches. This helps in better fund management.
(b) Investment portfolio management: Banks invest a substantial share of their assets in
approved
securities to meet liquidity and current liabilities. The average yield from such investments is
always
lower than other investments like commercial lending and personal loans. Before an
investment is
made, a number of parameters need to be analysed. Various analytical tools are used to
analyse the
investments. The target is to increase the yield on any investment. Various software packages
are
available that help to build mathematical and analytical models to solve the problems and are
used
to select and manage the investment portfolios and thereby maximise the return on
investment.
(c) Branch profiles: Most banking business is carried out at the branches. The controlling
authorities
at the head office control and support the branch activities. To do this, the head office needs a
proper flow of management information from the branches to the head office. This
information is
provided by the branches by sending various reports at regular intervals. The information sent
from
branches to head office covering branch profile may contain:
(i) Standing data file (SDF form)
(ii) Performance report file (PRF).
(i) The SDF form covers information about the branch such as name of the branch, name of
the zone, date of opening, pin code, type of premises (owned/leased/rented), name of the
district and state, number of tellers, etc. This information is collected only once and updates
may be made at the end of every year. This information helps to create various reports, e.g.
list of branches in a particular region, zone, a list of branches conducting specific business
and so on.
(ii) PRF contains the business details of the branches and is sent quarterly. This report
includes deposits, advances, other income, overheads, earnings and expenses, number of
accounts, capital expenditure, etc. These reports are used to analyse and monitor the
performance of branches. This information is valuable for planning and control activities at
head office. Various reports generated from the PRF database like the list of loss-making
branches, performance of the branch, region-wise advances and deposits, etc.
(d) Credit information system: The purpose of the computerised credit information
system is to provide
a comprehensive credit information that is used for credit planning and monitoring. The
major
objectives are:
(a) to have up-to-date information on all borrowal accounts for the entire bank,
(b) to generate various statutory statistical reports and control returns,
(c) to reduce the drudgery of work at all levels,
(d) to ensure timely and accurate availability of data and to generate exceptional reports
for
management information,
(e) to facilitate the review and renewals of borrowal accounts,
(f) to make available consolidated information for the borrowal accounts being one
entity.
29.3 LANs AND WANs
29.3.1 Local Area Network (LAN)
A computer network is an interconnected system of autonomous computers, each system
being capable of independent operation as well as being able to communicate with other
systems. A computer network is a data communication network mainly used to share data,
hardware and software resources and to improve the flow of information within an
organisation or beyond.
269
The computer network that links computers and peripherals within a localised area say,
within a building is known as LAN. Computers and related equipment can be connected
through nodes placed anywhere in the network.
FIGURE 29.1 Local Area Network
Generally, LAN will not extend beyond 100 metres. However, it can be up to a maximum
spread of 1 km and the number of devices supported may also vary from 2 to as many as
1000.
In LANs, each independent system is known as a node and when such nodes are
interconnected, it is known as a LAN.. Usually, there will be one central node (Server)
providing and controlling all the services of the network. The client nodes route their requests
to the server and obtain the necessary services. The way in which the server handles these
services differ depending upon the topology and protocols.
A LAN distinguishably uses network adapters that employ special techniques to share a
common medium (such as a cable or a radio or light wave) between the connected computers.
ALAN also uses some type of software to deal with simultaneous requests for service from
many client stations. Sharing common cabling and pooling resources within a work group are
the key elements of LAN operation.
29.3.2 Topology (Layout)
The way in which the devices are interconnected is known as topology. These are two basic
forms of local area network design used in information transmission; centralised control and
distributed control. The popular centralised control networks are star, tree and loop
topologies, while that of the distributed controls are ring and bus topologies. Each topology
has its advantages and disadvantages. Before we go into the details of the topologies, let us
understand how the data transmission takes place in a network. The methods of operation for
the transfer of data over networks are called packets switching.
270
(a) Star Topology
FIGURE 29.2 Topology (Layout)
The data, a user wishes to send commonly referred to as a message, is broken down into
smaller units called packets. Each packet consists of some data bits and a header containing
its destination address. The packets are passed from one packet by the switching exchange to
another, until they reach their destination.
With the bus topology, all devices on the network are connected to a single continuous cable.
Transmission from any station travels the length of the bus in both directions and is received
by all other stations. The main advantage of bus topology is that it is quite easy to set up.
Further, if one station on the LAN fails, it will not affect the rest of the network. The
advantage is that it not only limits the geographic spread but also offers limited flexibility for
change.
In a ring topology, the devices are connected in a closed loop and information is passed from
one node to the other in series. Data transmission is possible in one direction only. As the
packet circulates, the destination recognises its address and copies the packet contents onto it.
The breakdown of any one station on the ring can disable the entire LAN.
In a star topology, the central node is often the master. Each of the other nodes is joined to the
master by separate links. While this topology gives the advantage of giving maximum ability
to change, it cannot handle large traffic as every transaction has to pass through the central
node. However, if one node fails, it will not affect the network.
29.3.3 Protocols
When any two pieces of equipment are connected, effective communication will take place
only when they 'talk' and 'understand' the same language. In other words, there should be a
standard communication protocol. There are protocols for all aspects of communication links
like cables, connectors, etc., including the software running on the connected devices which
control the transmission of data over the network. The protocols are the rules for
communication between similar modules of processes, usually in different nodes. Protocols
define message formats and the rules for message exchange. It controls priority and sequence
of transmission, errors in transmission, and the process of beginning and concluding
conversion.
The network protocols depend on the adapters. Some of the commonly used types of adapters
are Ethernet and Token-RING. In the ethernet system, the listen-before-transmit media
sharing system is called the Carrier-Sense Multiple Access with Collision Detection
(CSMA/CD) system is used. Ethernet cards share the common wire by transmitting only
when the channel is clear. If two stations try to transmit simultaneously, a collision occurs.
The stations halt transmission and wait for a random period of time before retransmitting.
Token-ring systems use what is termed as a deterministic media-access
271
control system. The 'token' in 'token-ring' is actually a special frame, passed from node to
node, that gives a node permission to enter a frame into the ring. In the 'token-ring', the token
circulates when all stations are idle. A station wanting to transmit must wait until it detects a
token passing by. It then seizes the token and transforms it to a start-of-packet sequence for
its data packet. The data packet on the ring makes a round up. The destination station, on
seeing the data pass-by, copies data bits from this packet onto it. When the data packet comes
back to the source station, it removes the data bits from the packet and the token is set free.
Other Devices: There are several other devices used in connection with the networking. A
device called multiplexer is used to receive signals from several communication lines and
pass on to one communication line and vice versa. A multiplexer takes multiple low-speed
lines and combines their individual data transmission capacity needs so that a specific
grouping of them can be transmitted on a single high¬speed line.
Network Operating System: The function of the networking software is to set up some
computers as hosts, or servers, and some computers as clients to those hosts. The servers
manage the printer sharing, file sharing and communications link sharing to their clients. All
of these capabilities may run on a single server or be dedicated to several servers. The
networking software can run over any standard network. Generally, the network operating
systems fall into two categories: those that use DOS as the file system on the server and those
that use UNIX as the file system.
Branch-level Computerisation: The concept of LANs is fast becoming popular for branch
computerisation in banks. This is especially so where front-office computerisation is
concerned.
The front-office computerisation comprises the installation of several stand-alone systems
with online data entry and updates. These stand-alone systems are connected together via a
LAN, thus giving each system access to each other's database. The customer who comes to
make a withdrawal can go to any of the counters and present his cheque. The teller checks the
account number, whether sufficient balance is available and then issues the token to the
customer. The teller enters the withdrawal details and amount into the computer and the
balance of the account holder is reduced to that extent.
The above scenario can also be envisaged without a LAN, but the benefit of having a LAN is
that the customer is free to go to any counter and present his cheque. If the computers were
not networked, the customer would have to go to the particular counter, handling his ledger
account. This would have been a duplication of the manual system and would not lead to any
great leaps in productivity or saving of time.
Another scenario is where the stand-alone systems in the front-office, connected through a
LAN with each other, are also connected to a mini-computer installed in the branch for back-
office computerisation. Here, the networked stand-alone systems function as intelligent
terminals to the mini computer. The mini computer can access any data that is required from
the stand-alone systems at any time.
A major advantage of the above scenario is that the data entered into the stand-alone systems
need not be entered again into the mini computer. Another advantage of having stand-alone
systems in the front-office linked to the computer in the back-office is that the transaction
processing load of the front-office does not come on the back-office machine, which would
happen, if only dumb terminals connected to the mini computer were installed in the front-
office.
The advantages of using LANs in banks are that:
(a) The expensive resources such as computer hardware and software can be shared by
several users.
This brings down the overall cost of computerisation.
(b) The information stored on the host computer is available to all users of the system.
Therefore, there is no necessity of duplication of databases.
272
(c) Since all the terminals are intelligent terminals, the processing load is shared between the
various machines and there is no overloading on any single machine.
These are the various reasons why LAN is becoming very popular in front-office branch
computerisation. There are also a few shortcomings of a LAN, such as:
(a) Complicated software has to be installed for data management.
(b) Security risks are higher, since each user access the host computer independently.
(c) Maintenance cost of such a system is high, since it has to be done frequently.
29.3.4 Wide Area Network (WAN)
Wide Area Networks (WAN) are defined as a large-scale computer network spread over a
span of sizeable geographic area, normally utilising the telecommunication network.
Generally, the transmission speed and capacity are limited and the data transfer rates are very
low in case of WANs when compared to that of LANs. In the banking sector, the WANs are
generally used to interconnect branches with the regional offices, and regional/zonal offices
to head office, etc.
How a WAN Works
The wide area networks are formed based on the telecommunication network and hence the
type of network will differ in the method of telecommunication used. Separate data lines
dedicated between two or more computers are used, and such a network is called the leased
lines network. Computers can be linked by using ordinary telephone lines which is called
dial-up network. Connectivity can also be established by using satellite links or microwave
links. There could be a combination of all these methods also in single network.
Microwave systems are capable of broad band transmission. The signals in a microwave
system are transmitted directly from a dish antenna to a receiving dish antenna at the next
microwave station, located in a direct line of sight no more than about twenty five miles
away. Each relay station can catch and 'boost' the data signals, passing them on to other
receiving stations.
Satellite communications network is an alternative to wire telecommunications. Text, data,
voice and video information are converted to radio waves at Earth stations and are beamed up
over a broad band transmission channel to a satellite. The satellite relays the data back to an
Earth station or an antenna atop a tall building at the receiving location across the country or
around the world. Transmission takes only a fraction of a second.
Logically, any two computers connected through a telephone line needs a modem at each end.
These modems convert the digital signals of the computer into analogue signals at the
transmitting end and reconverts analogue signals into digital signals at the receiving end.
Depending upon the geographical location of the computers that are being connected, the
type of telecommunication media could be chosen.
Each of the computers connected in a WAN, requires connectivity to a telecommunication
line, a modem and a communication software that will take care of the transmission and
receipt of data.
Regional Office/Circle/Zonal Office-level Computerisation (LAN and WAN): A distributed
system is an approach to data processing in which processing and data storage tend to be
located at or near the points where the data occurs or the information is used, but with
communication links to allow access to and from other processing facilities and data storage
are required. With this concept, the data processing and transmission is done through LANs
and WANs.
By placing the computing resources at the user's end, provision of good support for analysis
and decision-making is made. Since much of the work is done locally, the cost is lower than
when it is done on the
273
mini/main frame computer system. The system itself works faster as the processing is shared
between several processors and the central computer does not get overloaded with the
processing load.
In fact, in its conclusion, the Rangarajan Committee Report on Computerisation (1989), also
favoured the DDP approach as it felt that this option would provide a better response time
and also more security in the case of line failures, since the majority of transactions, which
are 'local' in nature, can be still handled through the distributed data processing. The central
computer could also be updated later, as and when link is re-established.
The intelligent nodes can be installed in respective departments and they may be equipped
with a user friendly, menu-driven software to update, process and release of reports as and
when required.
The branch computer can also be linked with RO/ZO computers through WAN for faster
transfer of data and various reports to them, which help greatly in the quality of decision-
making and effective monitoring.
Use of the LAN, client server computing, RDBMS packages like Oracle, Sybase, etc., and
front-end tools like Powerbuilder, Developer 2000, visual tools may provide better
performance with considerable price. The use of various methods helps to analyse the RO-
Ievel or ZO-Ievel data for manpower planning, credit monitoring, etc.
Head Office-level Computerisation (LAN and WAN)
There is another approach of computerisation of the head office apart from main frame
computer networking, i.e. through LAN and WAN. In this system, the departments of the
head office would be provided with intelligent terminals having appropriate software
packages specially for the respective department. The head office computer should be linked
with the RO/ZO computers through WAN for faster transfer of information to the head office.
This way the data can be directly accessed by the respective departments also it would be
processed by them for decision-making, monitoring and policy implementation effectively.
The data, reports or proposals can also be directly sent to respective departments of the head
office by RO/ZO computers for a quick decision and response. This reduces the higher
computerisation expenditure.
The head office can also take decisions for investments or can submit returns to regulatory
authorities in time. In the current technological environment, the transfer of information at an
appropriate time and place is an important part of day-to-day business. This would not only
help in enhancing business and profitability, but also provide security to a greater extent.
29.4 UNINTERRUPTED POWER SYSTEM (UPS)
Uninterrupted power system provides clean and reliable AC power to the computer systems
protecting them from power blackouts, brownouts, swells, sags, surges, and interface. In case
of a power failure, the UPS attached with the file server automatically takes over the power
supply to the file server or to the main computer to eliminate the chance of data loss. The
work stations and other terminals are also attached with the UPS.
The general feature of an UPS is an inverter and battery charger with an automatic change
over of power supply from battery or load. The UPS are of two types:
Online UPS: In an online UPS, the main 230 V input current is converted into 48 V DC and
from the battery charger-cum-rectifier is then converted to a 230 VAC, even in the case of
main supply available and the power is supplied to the computer systems. In case of power
failure, the 48 V DC is supplied by the batteries. It comes back automatically to the normal
status when the main supply recovers. In bank computerisation, online UPS is used.
274
Offline UPS: In offline UPS, battery charger and inverter are two separate parts for doing
their jobs independently. When the power is available through main, the battery charger is
only charging the battery and inverter is on stand-by. In case of a mains power supply
interruption, the batteries are connected to the inverter through an electronic change-over and
the current is supplied to the computer systems. It supplies raw power and does not regulate
the input frequency. In this system, backup time is very low (in the order of a few
milliseconds).
FIGURE 29.3 UPS
29.5 CORE BANKING
Core banking has a centralised branch computerisation model where the branches are
connected to a central host, which incorporates branch automation modules and online
multiple delivery channels like ATM, ABB, Debit Card, Tele-banking/mobile banking,
internet banking, etc., under one roof. In core banking, there is a central database for the bank
and transactions are done centrally, online. It offers integrated products and services to
customers round the clock. There is scope for induction of modern banking services and one
single software for all the branches and is operated on the bank's WAN infrastructure.
29.5.1 Business Components
(a) To have retail customer banking modules
(b) Deposits, loans, bills, remittances, locker, clearing, etc.
(c) Trade finance/forex modules
(d) Government business modules
(e) To have corporate finance and service branch modules
(f) To have enhanced MIS modules
(g) To have modules for business intelligence
(h) To integrate with the existing ATMs, tele-banking, debit card, kiosks and other delivery
channels (i) To have any branch banking, Internet banking and call centre
275
(j) To interface with existing corporate systems like treasury, IBR, centralised accounting
system, HRMS, ALM, credit appraisal and management, credit monitoring and NPA
management, etc. (k) To interface with systems like NDS, SFMS, RTGS, CFMS, etc.
29.5.2 Benefits
(a) Enables the establishment of a reliable centralised data repository for the bank
(b) Facilitates data warehousing and data mining technologies for business intelligence
(c) Easy implementation of integrated customer centric services like online ATMs, tele-
banking, internet banking, any branch banking, kiosk banking, cash management services,
etc.
(d) Enables centralised management information, decision support and executive
information systems
(e) Efficient and effective MIS, ALM, risk management, etc., using the central data pool
(f) Enables centralised management and control with centralised data
(g) Standardisation of the branch automation software using a single version. Quick
adoption of software changes as changes are done only at the central site
(h) Facilitates business process re-engineering (BPR) to streamline the existing processes
(i) Relieves branches of jobs like data backup, MIS generation, etc.
(j) Requires infrastructure at the central location, backup location and at branches
(k) Servers are not mandatory at branch locations
(1) Attracts higher investment in the beginning
(m) Cost of implementation for further branches and delivery channels relatively cheaper
(n) Core infrastructure can be used for future expansions
(0) No extra cost for implementation of SFMS, RTGS, CFMS, etc.
29.5.3 Essential Requirements
Creation of Primary Data Centre
(a) For housing the central server for online transactions
(b) The central database will be used for all customer centric delivery channel services
integrated with the CBS and for the bank's various corporate business requirements
(c) To be manned round the clock to offer 24 x 7 service to customers
(d) Skilled activities such as database administration, backups, network monitoring, on
call support, troubleshooting, parameterisation, customisation, support of delivery channels
are performed at the data centre.
Disaster Recovery Site (DRS)
Disaster recovery sites (DRSs) are used for the following purposes:
(a) To avoid disruption in the business activities of CBS branches due to central system
or network failures
(b) To ensure non-stop functioning of branches and online delivery channels integrated
with CBS
(c) To act as a backup for providing reliable and continuous processing environment
These technologically advanced centres have the presence of various multinational IT
companies.
Business Process Re-engineering (BPR)
Business Process Re-engineering (BPR) helps in the following tasks:
(a)To help the bank to realign the existing business processes in tune with benefits provided
by the new technology platform.
(a) To help the bank in taking advantage of the best business practices available in the
technology platform to provide more efficient services
276
(c) Processes aligned with the technology platforms provide the bank with the capability for
the delivery of enhanced value to their customers and also gain from the changed processes.
Specialised Consultancy
(a) CBS being a critical project with complexities of multi-level delivery systems
involving higher
investments as well as manpower requirements, a specialised consultancy service was
suggested
for centralised banking
(b) Consultant to have expertise/experience in implementing CBS in other banks
(c) To assist in the designing, crystallising requirements and formulation of
implementation of strategies.
(d) To advise the bank on all aspects of centralised banking requirements
(e) To proceed further, after getting the expert recommendations/suggestions of the
specific consultants.
Infrastructure
Software: The software comprises:
(a) Branch functional modules
(b) Delivery channel requirements like ATMs, tele-banking, internet banking, and
information kiosks
(c) Interfaces to integrate systems like NOS, SFMS, RTGS, CFMS, etc.
(d) Tools tor business intelligence and management information.
Hardware: The hardware at the data centre and DRS will be 'configured' based on the
transaction volume of the proposed branches.
Networking
(a) Leased lines of WAN should be used as a primary communication channel for CBS.
(b) Adequate redundancies will be built-in to address any network failures.
(c) ISDN link will be used as a backup
29.6 LET US SUM UP
The objective of computerisation in India is not to replace men with machines. Rather, the
objective is to make the work life more meaningful. As we deal in an industry, which is the
largest processor of information and data, reliance on technology is inevitable. Needless to
say, absorption and effective utilisation of the new technology will involve a change in
structure, organisation and systems as well as attitudes of those working in the industry.
29.7 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS
(b) Software
(d) All of the above
1. A computer network mainly used to share
(a) Data
(c) Hardware (e) None of these
(b) Nodes (d) CPU
2. Terminals connected to a server is known as
(a) Clients
(c) (a)&(b) (e) None of these
3. For uninterrupted power supply in branch computerisation, the following device is
used
(a) Online UPS (b) Offline UPS
(c) Convertor (d) Generator
(e) None of these
4. Proper functioning of a computerised system is ensured by
(a) Generation of audit trails (b) Exceptional transaction report
(c) Tallying of cash book (d) All of the above
(e) None of these
5. In muiti-user computer networking
(a) Computers are based on a centralised processing concept
(b) Various terminals are attached to the main computer
(c) All data and information is kept on the main computer
(d) Large number of users can be connected to a central computer
(e) All of above
6. In star topology
(a) Each node is joined to the central node by a separate link
(b) Devices are connected in a closed loop
(c) Information is passed from one node to the another in series
(d) Devices on the network are connected to a single continuous cable
(e) All of above
7. In bus topology
(a) Each node is joined to the central node by a separate link
(b) Devices are connected in a closed loop
(c) Information is passed from one node to another in series
(d) Devices on the network are connected to a single continuous cable
(e) All of above
8. In ring topology
(a) Each node is joined to the central node by a separate link
(b) Devices are connected in a closed loop
(c) Information is passed from one node to the other in series (d) (b) & (c)
(d) All of above
9. In Core banking system
(a) Branches are connected to a central host
(b) Branch automation modules and delivery channels are incorporated
(c) Transactions are done centrally and online
(d) All of above
(e) None of these
10. Benefits in Core Banking is
(a) Reliable centralised data recovery
(b) Data warehousing and data mining technologies
(c) Integrated customer centric services
(d) Core infrastructure can be used for future expansion
(e) All of above
29.8 ANSWERS TO 'CHECK YOUR PROGRESS'
1. (d), 2. (c), 3. (a), 4. (d), 5. (e), 6. (a), 7. (d), 8. (c), 9. (d), 10. (e).
29.9 KEYWORDS
Channel, Disk mirroring, Disk duplexing, Dumb terminals, Server.
PAYMENT SYSTEMS AND ELECTRONIC BANKING
STRUCTURE
30.0 Objectives
30.1 Introduction
30.2 Electronic Payment Systems
30.2.1 Automated Teller Machines (ATMs)
30.2.2 HWAK (The Intelligent Auto-teller and Netware Management System)
30.3 Personal Identification Number (PIN)
30.4 Electromagnetic Cards
30.4.1 Credit Cards
30.4.2 Multiple PINs
30.4.3 Electronic Purse
30.4.4 Bank Card
30.4.5 Electronic Cheque
30.4.6 Electronic Cash
30.4.7 Electronic Token
30.4.8 Corporate Cash Management Services
30.5 Electronic Banking
30.5.1 Anytime Banking
30.5.2 Anywhere Banking
30.5.3 Home Banking (Corporate and Personal)
30.5.4 Internet Banking
30.5.5 Mobile Banking
30.5.6 Electronic Commerce (E-Commerce)
30.6 Signature Storage and Retrieval System
30.7 Cheque Truncation
30.8 Note and Coin Counting Machines
30.9 Microfiche
30.10 Let Us Sum Up
30.11 Check Your Progress
30.12 Answers to 'Check Your Progress'
30.13 Keywords
280
30.0 OBJECTIVES
After reading this unit, you should be able to:
• Define electronic payment systems and describe the different types of such systems.
• Describe the various electromagnetic cards.
• Explain electronic banking in terms of the process and types.
• Appreciate the signature and retrieval systems.
• Identify the use of other electronic devices.
30.1 INTRODUCTION
The growth of technology has changed payment systems the world over during the past two
decades. More and more innovations are being introduced in both the cash payment systems
and non-cash payment systems. Cash in the form of notes and coins was the principal method
of payment before the introduction of the 'Banking' paper instruments such as 'Cheques' and
'Credit Transfer' now have become a part of the payment system with the popularity of
banking. With the introduction and implementation of the recent technology in banking,
electronic devices are making the job of cash payment as well as non-cash payments easy and
efficient. The introduction of the automatic teller machines (ATMs) and the plastic cards has
given the banking customers the facility of round the clock (24 hours) banking.
30.2 ELECTRONIC PAYMENT SYSTEMS
The major routine processing in day-to-day banking operations originates at the cash counter
or teller counters in the banks. Essentially, the idea behind the electronic payment system is
that a number of the activities related to payment should be done with the help of computers.
30.2.1 Automated Teller Machines (ATMs)
Automated Teller Machines (ATMs) are primarily used for performing some of the banking
functions such as the withdrawal of cash or the deposit of cash/cheque, etc., by using an ATM
card. The committee headed by Dr. C. Rangarajan recommended the setting up of ATMs in
India. They are to be strategically located at airports, railway stations, hospitals, important
commercial centres, as well as bank branches, for use by the customers.
Stand-alone ATMs made their appearance in India, in the early 1990s. For facilitating the
operations through these ATMs, the customer was provided with an ATM card with a unique
personal identification number (PIN). Whenever a customer performs a transaction, the
person has to key in the PIN which is validated by the ATM, before the machine permits any
transaction. The PIN has to be kept secret by the customer, to prevent any misuse or
fraudulent transactions in the event of loss of the card.
Convenience of ATMs
To the Customers:
(a) 24 x 7 access availability
(b) Less time for transactions (less queue)
(c) Privacy in transactions
(d) Any branch/anywhere banking enabled
(e) Acceptability of card across multiple bank ATMs, even foreign tourists can access
Maestro/VISA / ATMs
(f) Other services enabled in ATMs in addition to cash dispensing includes clearing
cheques deposits, balance enquiry, cheque book requisition, details of recent transactions.
To the Bank:
(a) Cost of setting up ATMs is lower than setting up a branch
(b) Migration of the routine transactions to the ATMs frees the bank staff for more
productive work
(c) ATMs serve as the crucial touch point for cross-selling of the bank's products
(d) Enables the bank to display products on the screen and serves as a media for publicity
for the bank
(e) Less hassle in handling cash.
ATM Models in India
Online: When the ATM is connected to the bank's database and provides online real time
access to the customers accounts, it is said to be 'online.' Normally, there is a daily limit of
withdrawal set by the bank. This limit is monitored by the ATM switch centre.
Offline: When an ATM is not connected to bank's database, it is stated to be 'offline.' In this
mode, withdrawals are permitted up to a pre-fixed limit only, irrespective of the balance
available in customers' accounts.
Stand-alone: When an ATM is not connected to any ATM network, it is said to be 'stand-
alone'. In this case, transactions at an ATM are restricted to customers of the ATM branch and
its link branches.
Networked: When ATMs are connected to an ATM network, they are said to be 'networked'.
The advantage of networked ATMs is that cardholders can use their ATM cards at any of the
networked-ATMs. This in effect permits 'anywhere anytime' banking.
Cash Dispenser (CD)
Cash dispenser is a pruned down version of the ATM. CD is an ATM without a depository
and is intended to serve the customers for making cash withdrawals only.
Networking of ATMs
For optimising the cost on investments in ATMs, Banks joined together in small clusters to
share their ATM networks. There are many such ATM network clusters functioning in India.
In order to facilitate inter-operability among these clusters at the national level, the IDRBT
has initiated the process of setting up a 'National Financial Switch' to facilitate apex level
connectivity of other switches established by banks.
Indian Banks' Association (IBA) was the first to set up a shared payment network system
(SPNS) or SWADHAN network of ATMs of its member banks in Mumbai. The network went
live on 1 February, 1997. The objective behind the SWADHAN network is to provide 24
hours, 7 days a week electronic banking service to the customer of a member bank any where
in the city of Mumbai. The customer is free to conduct transactions at the ATMs of any of the
member banks located in the neighbourhood.
Thus, ATMs in India have come to occupy a key component of retail channel strategy
adopted by the banks worldwide. As a self-service channel, banks have delivered exceptional
customer convenience in deploying the ATMs. In the Indian situation, the public sector banks
are implementing their technology blueprint by networking their branches. Their customers
have started experiencing the transition from being a branch customer, to becoming a
customer of the bank, thanks to the core banking solutions which are under implementation.
ATMs Customer Interface
The following components of the ATM provide the customer interface:
(a) Video Display Monitor
(b) Keyboard/Keypad
282
(c) Touch Screen
(d) Slots: There are slots in the ATM for various purposes as detailed below:
(i) Card Reader (ii) Cash Dispenser
(iii) Envelope Dispenser (iv) Deposit Slot
Future Perspectives of ATMs
The future plans include expanding the network by connecting more ATMs over the next five
years for:
(a) increasing the number of transactions per day per ATM
(b) establishing connectivity with point of sale (POS) terminals at merchant
establishments
(c) e-ticketing in railways, roadways and airways
(d) providing international payment networks such as VISA and Master Card.
FIGURE 30.1 ATM 30.2.2 HWAK (The Intelligent Auto-teller and Netware Management
System)
Intelligent auto-teller systems are a special breed of auto-teller machines capable of thinking
for themselves, that means they are fast, impose less demands on your banking systems and
serve the customers more like a personal banker than less sophisticated auto teller systems.
HWAK provides unsurpassed service even without benefit of a reliable communication
network.
Benefits of HWAK are:
(a) Customer satisfaction.
(b) High availability
(c) Online and offline auto-recovery
(d) Anytime full banking service
(e) Low cost, shorter queues and less number of tellers with ease of use
(f) Quick and early implementation
(g) Enhanced security and audit control
(h) Network management
(i) Predictable cost of ownership
(j) Comprehensive 'One Stop' autobanking.
30.3 PERSONAL IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (PIN)
A magnetic strip is fixed on the back of the cards. This strip holds certain information about
the customer
283
such as his account number, personal identification number (PIN), etc. After insertion of the
card into the appropriate slot, the ATM or POS device reads the account number, with the
number embossed on the card itself and checks the number with the information stored into
the database available to it through an attached computer. Once the card is found valid, the
ATM/POS terminal prompts the cardholder to enter his/her PIN. Once this PIN is entered by
the cardholder, the ATM/POS terminal checks whether it is correct or not. Once the PIN
matches with the one stored in the computer, the cardholders will be allowed to proceed with
his transaction on the ATM/POS terminal. A PIN is similar to the password that a user of a
computer has to give when he/she wants to use it. Unfortunately, in an ATM or a POS
terminal, the passwords can be a combination of numerical digits only as it uses a limited
number of keys to operate.
Banks which issue cards for use on ATMs, POS terminals, etc., also give a PIN along with the
card. The PIN is a randomly generated sequence of digits which is printed on paper and is
automatically folded and sealed before it even reaches the bank's own officials. The seal is to
be opened only by the card holder and has to be kept secure. It is generally suggested that the
card and the sheet of paper containing the PIN be kept in separate pouches, so that the
chances of it being lost or stolen together are rare.
30.4 ELECTROMAGNETIC CARDS
In the modern day of commerce, credit cards have acquired a fairly prominent and pervasive
role. With the increasing use of the credit cards, the society is moving towards cashless
transactions. In India, however, the use of the credit cards is restricted to small values and
mostly personal transactions. The two international credit card giants, viz., Visa International
and Master Card International are already present in India and are poised to make deeper
inroads in the untapped Indian market.
30.4.1 Credit Cards
Let us see how a credit card is issued and used. Generally, a bank enters into an agreement
with its customer and issues the customer a credit card. A credit card is a small plastic card
around 8.5 cm by 5.5 cm. It has the name and the account number of the holder embossed on
it. In addition, the date up to which the card is valid will also be embossed and a specimen
signature panel on the reverse. The card issuer should normally get the card holder to sign on
the specimen signature panel in his presence
FIGURE 30.2 Master Card and Visa Card
284
before parting with the credit card. The limit up to which the card holder can make purchases
in a month is also informed to the card holder; this limit is called the card-limit.
Many card issuers, being banks, also allow withdrawals of cash for emergency purposes and
levy a service fee for such withdrawals. Many banks also have credit cards which double up
as ATM cards.
There are different types of credit cards, some of which are discussed below:
(a) Charge card (b) Debit card (c) Credit card
(d) Smart card or Chip card (e) Restricted card/Member card
Charge Card
In such cards, transactions are accumulated over a period of time, generally a month and the
total amount charged, i.e. debited to the account. The credit card holder is given about 25 to
50 days' time to credit his account in case there are insufficient funds in his account at the
time of debit.
Since the transactions are accumulated, it is only charged, i.e. not debited to the account
immediately, such cards are called charge cards.
Credit Card
This is the same as a charge card where the transactions are charged to the account with the
total value of transactions debited to the card holder's account once in a month. The
difference between the credit and charge card is that in case of charge card, the amount
becomes payable immediately on the debit to the account. In case of credit cards, the
cardholder has the option to pay the entire amount as soon as the account is debited or he may
choose to pay only a certain percentage of the amount debited and he gets a credit to extent of
rest, i.e. he can pay it in monthly instalments later. However, a service fee is charged on the
amount, payment of which is deferred.
Debit Cards
A bank-issued card that allows its user to access their funds for the purpose of paying for
merchandise. A debit card acts like a credit card, the difference being that funds are
immediately taken from the cardholders accounts.
Smart Cards
The Smart Card looks exactly like any other plastic card or an ATM card with an integrated
circuit (IC Chip) installed. The IC chip contains memory, may contain a processor, and
communicates with the external world through contacts on the surface of the card. The size,
position and utility of the contacts are specified by an international standard (ISO 7816), so
that cards can interact with a variety of equipment.
FIGURE 30.3 Smart Card and Smart Card Readei
285
There are two main types of smart cards: Intelligent memory chip and micro-processor cards.
Memory smart cards have been around for several years. They are being used in pay phones,
identification, access control, voting and other applications.
Processor smart cards are the most advanced and are ideally suited for banking and financial
applications where reuse of the card is allowed. These cards have a built-in memory and the
processor along with an operating system. They perform the financial operations. As
intelligence is built-in, they can protect themselves against fraudulent operations. This
protection is based on the data encryption standard (DES), which is accepted by the
International Standard Organisation as safe enough for protecting electronic funds transfer
(EFT) transactions. For smart cards, ISO 7816 defines the physical features and the
communication protocols. ISO 10202 defines the security features.
Terminal Requirements: A special terminal must be used to read and update the smart card,
with the following features:
A smart card reader must be available that meets ISO specifications and can read and write
the card.
A secure pin pad must be provided, which allows the user to enter the PIN and have it
checked by the smart card. The pin pad would have to store the secret keys for the application
and must be designed so that it is impossible to extract these keys under any circumstances.
Security Advantages: The security level has even been certified by independent and
competent authorities. Unlike a conventional magnetic strip card, which can be easily erased
or copied, smart card has a protected and much larger memory. Smart cards also have
confidential memory zones holding secret user information.
The Future is Bright: The future of the smart card in the banking and the financial sector is
very bright and it is evident that leading players in electronic funds transfer have already
realised this. Earlier in 1993, NATWest Bank of the UK announced its Mondex system, based
on smart cards. Visa and Master Card have also joined hands with Europe's largest ATM
network, Europay to set standards for smart card-based electronic fund transfer systems. In
India too, there are moves afoot to introduce smart card-based personal banking.
Member Card
This is used exclusively by members of a club or a chain of hotels. For example, the Taj Card
is a card issued by the Management of Taj Group of Hotels to be used by patrons of their
hotels. The cards are for use in their hotels only. Similarly, there are many other types of
cards where the usage is exclusive to the members of a group or establishment.
The advantages of credit card system to the concerned parties are as under: To the cardholder:
(a) It is convenient for him to carry a credit card in his wallet and make trouble-free
travel or purchase.
It allows him to draw cash too
(b) It inculcates a sense of financial discipline in him
(c) It provides a proof of purchase through banking channels to strengthen his position in
case of disputes with sellers, etc.
(d) It also gives him exposure to banking
(e) It also allows him to delegate spending power to add-on members
(f) It also extends additional facilities like insurance cover/discount, etc.
To the merchant establishment:
(a) Increase in sales because of increased purchasing power of the cardholder due to unbilled
credit
286
(b) Preferred locations by a cardholder
(c) Less need for the merchant establishments to provide customers with extended credit
facility, which
is likely to be a costly burden to them
(d) Systematic accounting since sale receipts are routed through banking channels
(e) Advertising and promotional support on a national scale
(f) Development of a prestigious clientele base
(g) Assured and immediate settlement/payment
(h) Avoids all the cost and security problems involved in handling cash.
To banks:
(a) Scope and potential for better profitability out of share earned from the traders'
turnover
(b) Helps in establishing banking relationship with new customers
(c) This also provides additional customer service to the existing clients. Better network
spread of
cardholders and their increased use means higher popularity and image for the banks
(d) Savings of expenses on cash holding/stationery printing and manpower to handle
clearing
transactions.
Modes of Acceptance of Card Manual
(a) In this mode, merchant has to verify the genuineness of the card from the warning
bulletin which is
supplied regularly
(b) After ascertaining the genuineness of the card, the merchant has to take the imprint of
the card on
charge slips supplied for the purpose
(c) Interchange fee: This is the percentage on the total value of transaction which goes to
the bank. In
case of manual acceptance, it is 1.67 per cent
(d) Manual acceptance is recommended at merchant establishments with low ticket size
(average value
of transaction) except jewellery, electronic goods, handicraft, hotels and air tickets, where
chances
of fraudulent transactions are high.
Electronic
(a) Card is accepted through electronic EDC (Electronic Data Capture) machines.
Validity of the card
and credit limit is verified online and approval is by the merchant online
(b) Interchange fee in this mode is 1.10 per cent per month. Here, the merchant should
have a telephone
facility.
30.4.2 Multiple PINs
One of the most primary features of the smart card is security to prevent card-related crimes
and frauds. Chips for smart cards are not publicly available. We have seen that the smart card
has different pockets of storage of cash for different types of transactions. Personal
identification security concerns the linking of the card to its rightful owner, which is the most
commonly used method for identifying. There may be unique PIN for each pocket, meaning
that a smart card may have multiple PINs.
Apart from multiple PIN facility, other security features are also available with the smart
card, which are as under:
Dynamic signature verification: It traces the way in which a signature is written - the
dynamic signature tablet automatically verifies whether the signature is genuine or not.
Fingerprint verification: It is used to identify whether the user of the smart card is genuine or
not by electronically scanning fingerprint ridges.
287
Voice recognition systems: It uses a computer which is programmed to recognise different
voices and compares the voice with the recorded original.
Hand geometry: Research has shown that individual hands have unique features such as
finger lengths, skin web opacity and radius of curvature of fingerprints. Systems are available
to measure hand geometries by scanning them.
Retinal pattern verification: The pattern of the blood vessels on the retina of the human eye is
a unique physical characteristic; the retina is scanned using a low intensity infrared beam and
the person's identification is thereby ascertained.
Vein recognition: This method, like retinal pattern identification, uses the unique vein
structure of the human body to identify individuals. The 'vein check' system uses a simple
infrared scanning and encoding technique to locate the number, position and size of
subcutaneous vessels.
Visual recognition: It is possible to digitise a picture of a person and store it in a smart card
memory. The picture, usually obtained by a scanning video camera, is digitised and then
compressed to enable it to be stored in the smart card. These days, this system is becoming
very popular.
30.4.3 Electronic Purse
The card has space for several 'electronic purses', each for the storage of an amount. These
can be used for different types of accounts of the user. In addition, there is space for user data
such as address, the branch where the user has his account, and even the last thirty to fifty
transactions.
The advantages of the processor smart card are: security, reliability and longer life. No
wonder that this card is being used for financial systems in many developed countries.
For the Bank: Electronic purse provides a new method of payment which allows the bank to
enter into a transaction market which is complementary to the credit or debit card transaction
market. Electronic purse presents no risk of bad payment. Revenue is guaranteed from
existence of the float account.
For the Purse Holder: The cash in an electronic purse cannot be spent if the purse is reported
stolen or lost. A new electronic purse can be issued after loss, theft or destruction with the
original balance restored. A single card can conveniently pay all small to medium purchases.
For the Merchants: Electronic purse represents a single method of accepting payments with
no cash float to manage and no risk of theft.
30.4.4 Bank Card
Bank card service provider, European International is embarking on a programme to update
its European payment systems network. EPS - Europay is a private network which carries
transaction information on personal payment cards such as Eurocard and Master Card.
Europay provides a full range of services including Travellers cheques, cheque guarantee,
ATM, electronic point-of-sale, credit and charge card services. EPS-Net is getting updated
due to demands for increased security and to keep pace with new card technology.
30.4.5 Electronic Cheque
The smart card can be used during electronic fund transfer at the point-of-sales (EFTPOS). At
a retailer's checkout, the card is placed in the reader, where it automatically goes through
authentication sequences. To authorise payments, the customer types in the PIN and the
cardholder's bank account is automatically debited and the retailer's account credited. Also a
record of the transaction is stored in the card.
30.4.6 Electronic Cash
Funds can be loaded into a card for use as cash. This electronic cash can then be used for
making
288
purchases, necessarily requiring authorisation of PIN; the retailer presents this information to
the bank so that his account can be credited.
30.4.7 Electronic Token
The principle here is that a prepaid area is set aside to store electronic units of time or
electronic tickets, etc., for a specific service or item. Magnetic strip cards are often used with
public telephones, parking meters and vending machines.
30.4.8 Corporate Cash Management Services
Banks are now beginning to provide corporate cash management services to companies and
other major clients. In this area, the smart card can act as secure keys, allowing the account
holders to access the banks' mainframe computers to view their accounts and transfer money
automatically between accounts.
30.5 ELECTRONIC BANKING
With the introduction of computers in Indian banks and with the advent of ATMs, the banking
services are provided across the banks. Customers need not necessarily visit the branch to do
banking transactions, when the banks provide them with tele-banking or remote-banking
facility. This type of banking is called electronic banking and the concept is becoming
popular with individuals as well as corporate entities in India.
30.5.1 Anytime Banking
ATMs have eliminated the time limitations of customer service, and offer a host of banking
services, including deposits, withdrawals, requisitions, instructions and transfers. The
customer need not be concerned much about the security, as most ATM locations have
guards, or alternately are located in lobbies, access to which is electronically controlled by
means of the customer's ATM card. Besides, access to the account is through a PIN which is
strictly supposed to be only known to the cardholder.
HSBC Ltd., for instance, has taken the concept of remote banking further by providing a
service called Hexagon, which allows the customer to access his accounts from a PC that is
installed at his office or at his home - that is desktop banking - for the customer. This access
is also available for worldwide locations, giving the customer fingertip access to his accounts
worldwide.
30.5.2 Anywhere Banking
With the introduction of ATMs and tele-banking, financial details can be accessed from
remote locations and basic transactions can be effected even outside the bank. Interstation
connectivity of ATMs has also facilitated withdrawals from other stations, a service
particularly useful for frequent travellers. The facility of using credit cards on ATMs is also
available and more recently, mutual arrangements between banks are made for allowing the
use of any bank's ATM card on any other bank's ATMs. With the implementation of
Rangarajan committee's report, Government approval to set up ATMs at non-branch
locations, such as airports, shopping malls and office complexes, as is prevalent in other
countries has revolutionised banking in the Indian context. In some of the Indian public
sector banks, remote banking is being further extended to the customer's office and home.
30.5.3 Home Banking (Corporate and Personal)
Today, banking customers are more affluent and technologically sophisticated than ever
before. With less and less time available to conduct routine banking business, more and more
of them have become comfortable with the idea of using machines for a wide range of
banking services.
289
Corporate Banking
Remote banking has become very popular among corporate customers especially big
business/industrial houses which are already automated. More and more banks are providing
customer terminals right in the customer's office, which facilitates the customers to operate
the account without physically coming to the bank. For availing these services from the banks
which have this facility, the customer requires a computer, a telephone connection and a
modem. Moreover, any of these items need not be dedicated for this purpose and could be
utilised only at the time of performing banking transactions thereby do not involve any
additional investments.
At present, by utilising remote banking facility, corporate customers will be able to get the
following services:
(a) Getting their current balance or getting their statement of accounts for any pre-defined
period
(b) Ordering cheque books
(c) Ordering intra-bank and inter-bank fund transfers
(d) Instructing stop payments of cheques
(e) International remittances
(f) Opening letter of credits.
By obtaining a special SWIFT (Society for Worldwide Inter-Bank Financial
Telecommunication) authentication facility in arrangement with their bankers, customers will
be able to directly prepare messages in the SWIFT format by sitting in their office, and
transfer the particulars in the respective templates to their bankers. The bankers will directly
authenticate the transaction thereby the entire transaction is completed across the globe
within minutes.
Personal Banking
By using tele-banking facility, customers can dial up the branch's designated telephone
number, which is connected to the computer and, by dialing his identification number, will be
able to get the connectivity to the branch's designated computer. The software provided in the
machine will be interactive with the customer asking him to dial the code number of the
service required by him and suitably answers him. A customer can have access to his balance,
and also can place order for statement of accounts, cheque books and a few selected services
through this tele(phone) banking.
The customers who have modems and a personal computer at home can have direct
connectivity with the branch's computer through telephone line, and can obtain similar
services, besides additional services like transferring the statement of his account from the
branch's computer to his own personal computer. The number of services offered at present is
however limited.
Telebanking
The function of telebanking services is based on the voice processing facility available with
the bank computers. The caller, generally a customer of the bank, will be able to call the bank
anytime and enquire balances or transaction history, and to transfer funds between accounts.
In this system, the bank's computer is connected to a telephone link with modem. The voice
processing facility provided in the software identifies the caller, by keyword and provides
him services with suitable reply. Some banks use a telephone answering machine, in which
case the service is not really 'tele-banking' per se, but simply a telephone answering system.
Apart from tele-banking, another system, simple and for limited service is also available -
known as voice mail facility. There are several foreign banks now offering very advanced
touch-tone telephone answering services which route the customer's call directly to the
department concerned of the bank. It also allows the customer to leave a message for the
concerned desk or department if the person is not
290
available. In this system, each service representative has his or her 'Voice-Mail' Postbag in
which massages are stored and retrieved upon his return to the desk. With the help of
telephone answering system, the enquiries are most common in computerised railway
reservation system.
Update Facilities
We have studied the different types of banking through electronic media. Let us study the
different approaches which can be adopted for updating transactions generated in a bank.
These are:
(a) Online updates (b) Batch updates
Online updates: Online may be defined as the direct linking of an operation or equipment to a
computer system so that any stimulus provided by that operation or equipment is immediately
accepted by the computer system. This means that when a transaction is entered by the user,
the computer acknowledges it and updates the related files which are affected by the
particular transaction, so that before the next transaction is produced, the files in the computer
already contain the updated data.
The first application of online updation in banks is in front-office mechanisation. The
following are the few cases, in which online updation is required.
(i) Foreign Exchange Transaction: When the bank enters into a contract to buy or sell foreign
exchange on behalf of its clients, the transaction is immediately entered into the computer of
that authorised foreign exchange dealing branch. The computer in the branch is linked to a
central computer at the bank's head office. The moment the data regarding the foreign
exchange transaction is entered into the branch computer, it is transmitted to the central
computer, where the requisite files are updated immediately.
This online updation is very necessary as the bank must know its outstanding short or long
position in each currency at any given time. This information is used by the banks to
determine the action to be taken to safeguard the bank's position by entering into currency
swaps as they deem necessary, (ii) Automatic Teller Machine: Some of the ATMs function on
the principle of online updation. These types of ATMs are linked to a central computer which
contains the database of the customer accounts.The database is constantly updated with data
from ATMs linked to it.
Batch updates: Everyday at the end of the banking hours, the computer operators start
entering the data of the day's transactions into the computer. One operator takes up the entry
of all the cheques debited in customer accounts and cleared that day, the other operator is
given the data in the scroll book to total up the day's cash deposits, a third operator takes up
the work of entering the cheques which have been credited that day in the customer accounts
and so on.
After all the data is entered, it is processed by the computer. The branch officials can then
access the computer for information relating to the following:
• Total cash deposits and withdrawals made during the day.
• Reconciliation of cash receipts and withdrawals with that day's opening balance to
arrive at the
next day's opening balance, which should tally with the physical cash in hand.
• Check whether the balances of the bank in the customer accounts are reconciled after
taking into
account all the debits and credits posted in the day.
• Take the printout of the general ledger of the branch.
• Generate statistical returns required by the Regional/Zonal or the Head Office.
• Check whether the advances and fixed deposits are being maintained at the level
required by the head office.
• List of transactions entered would be taken which would be checked with the relative
vouchers. The above scenario is an example of local processing with batch updates. The input
data is collected in
291
a batch and then entered into the computer for processing. The next day again data is
collected in a batch and entered into the computer for processing.
30.5.4 Internet Banking
Banks have traditionally been in the forefront of harnessing technology to improve their
products, services and efficiency. They have, over a long time, been using electronic and
telecommunication networks for delivering a wide range of value added products and
services. The delivery channels include direct dial-up connections, private networks, public
networks, etc., and the devices include telephone, personal computers including the ATMs,
etc. With the popularity of PCs and easy access to Internet and World Wide Web (WWW),
banks increasingly use internet as a channel for receiving instructions and delivering their
products and services to their customers. This form of banking is generally referred to as
Internet Banking, although the range of products and services offered by different banks vary
widely both in their content and sophistication.
Broadly, the levels of banking services offered through the internet can be categorised in to
three types:
(a) The Basic Level Service is the banks' websites which disseminate information on
different products and services offered to customers and members of the public in general. It
may receive and reply to customers' queries through e-mail.
(b) In the next level is Simple Transactional Websites which allow customers to submit
their instructions, applications for different services, queries on their account balances, etc.,
but do not permit any fund-based transactions on their accounts.
(c) The third level of Internet banking services are offered by Fully Transactional
Websites, which allow the customers to operate on their accounts for transfer of funds,
payment of utility bills, subscribing to other products of the bank and to transact purchase and
sale of securities, etc. The above forms of Internet banking services are offered by traditional
banks, as an additional method of serving the customer or by new banks, who deliver banking
services primarily through Internet or other electronic delivery channels as the value added
services. Some of these banks are known as 'virtual' banks or 'Internet-only' banks and may
not have any physical presence in a country despite offering different banking services.
From the perspective of banking products and services being offered through Internet,
Internet banking is nothing more than traditional banking services delivered through an
electronic communication backbone, viz., Internet. But, in the process, it has thrown open
issues which have ramifications beyond what a new delivery channel would normally
envisage and hence, has compelled regulators world over to take note of this emerging
channel. Some of the distinctive features of i-banking are:
(i) It removes the traditional geographical barriers as it could reach out to customers of
different countries/legal jurisdiction. This has raised the question of jurisdiction of
law/supervisory system to which such transactions should be subjected,
(ii) It has added a new dimension to different kinds of risks traditionally associated with
banking,
heightening some of them and throwing new risk control challenges and risk perceptions,
(iii) Security of banking transactions, validity of electronic contract, customers' privacy, etc.,
which have always been matters of concern, given that the Internet is a public domain, not
subject to control by any single authority or group of users,
(iv) It poses a strategic risk of loss of business to those banks who do not respond in time to
this new technology, being the efficient and cost effective delivery mechanism of banking
services.
30.5.5 Mobile Banking
Mobile Banking comes with features like 128 bit encryption and open Internet technology,
i.e. it is not dependent on any specific service provider and the handset company. The service
is free of charge.
292
With this facility, customer - on his/her mobile screens - can check his bank balance, or order
a demand draft, stop cheque payment, request for a cheque book, look at the current interest
rates, or even the last three to five transactions round the clock.
30.5.6 Electronic Commerce (E-commerce)
E-commerce is a digital parlance. If you think that e-commerce, per se, is limited only to a
niche segment of business-to-business (82B) transactions, think twice! No doubt, the bulk of
the business done on the net would be in the business-to-business category, but this bulk will
be generated by business-to-business transactions.
E-commerce translates your otherwise intangible benefits. Other exciting developments
springing from e-commerce include a higher degree of personalisation, round-the-clock
advantage, fast and flexible execution, immediate customer reaction, and reduction in
operating cost.
E-commerce poses new challenges for all market participants. Banks face competition from
non-banks and near banks, which because of low barrier to market entry can play much more
easily in the electronic payment services market than in the markets for traditional bank
services.
For better communication facility for e-commerce, Government of India has planned that all
the state capitals and twelve major cities in the country will be provided exclusive optical
fibre links.
30.6 SIGNATURE STORAGE AND RETRIEVAL SYSTEM
Technology can help in this area by the use of computers, which can be used to store and
retrieve signature. The computer which contains the signatures is kept with the passing office.
The procedure for storing and retrieving specimen signatures is as follows:
Each signature card is scanned using a device called scanner. The scanner is a device which
takes the image of the specimen signature card and converts it to a digital from which is then
stored on the hard disk in the computer. Along with the signatures, other details like account
number, name, operating instructions are inputs to the computer. Each signature card is stored
in the computer in this way. Once all the details of the signature and related details of the
account are captured on the system, the data has to be verified, validated and authenticated.
Once it is authenticated, no changes can be made without proper authorisation. Once a
cheque is received by the passing officer, he can recall the signature in seconds on the
monitor by specifying the account number. He/she can even rotate the signature on the
monitor for any detailed verification. Many signature retrieval systems also provide the
facility of magnifying a portion of the signature for a close verification, if required. In case of
the fully computerised branches, the signatures stored on the main computer offers a lot more
flexibility. This is because the signatures can be viewed by multiple officers at the same time.
Restrictions can be introduced so that signatures and other information can be viewed only by
the authorised personnel. If, during inward clearing, the number of instruments to be cleared
is large, the job of verifying the instruments together with the signature can be distributed
among all the officers in the branch, as all of them can access the signatures and other details
of the customers simultaneously. Most fully computerised branches generally have a
signature storage and retrieval as an integral part of the software.
30.7 CHEQUE TRUNCATION
Originally, Section 6 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, defined cheque as 'a bill of exchange
drawn on a specified banker and not expressed to be payable otherwise than on demand'. This
section has been amended in September 2002 to include cheque truncations and electronic
cheques within the definition of cheque. The amended Section 6 reads as under:
293
'A cheque is a bill of exchange drawn on a specified banker and not expressed to be payable
otherwise than on demand and it includes the electronic image of a cheque truncation and a
cheque in the electronic form.'
Cheque truncation - Definition
A cheque truncation is defined by the new Section 6(b) of Negotiable Instruments Act as 'a
cheque which is truncated during the course of a clearing cycle, either by the Clearing House
or by the bank, whether paying or receiving payment, immediately on generation of an
electronic image for transmission, substituting the further physical movement of the cheque
in writing.'
Characteristics of a Cheque Truncation
(a) It is an electronic image of a paper cheque.
(b) Only the banks involved and the Clearing House can truncate a cheque (i.e. create an
electronic
image of a cheque). The drawer/holder of a cheque cannot truncate a cheque.
(c) The electronic image of the 'cheque truncation' will substitute the physical cheque
from the point and time of truncation onwards.
(d) Truncation is to be done only during the course of a clearing cycle to reduce the time
taken for realisation.
(e) The paper cheque, after truncation, is to be kept in the custody of the bank/clearing
house that truncated the cheque.
(f) Addition of digital signature of the truncating Bank/Clearing House to the electronic
image of the cheque truncation is optional.
Ways in which truncation can be done
1. Using MICR data: MICR cheques have the cheque number, city, bank and branch
numbers, and transaction code pre-coded. Abroad, even the account number of the customer
is precoded. During encoding at the collecting bank, the amount, as well as the payee's name,
is inserted in the MICR
line. The entire MICR line is then captured electronically. The electronic information is then
exchanged with other for clearing (Inter Bank Data Exchange or IBDE). The cheques do not
move any further.
2. Using image processing: Image processing, as we have seen earlier, is the latest
document handling system. Cheque image processing involves scanning of both sides of the
cheque and storing the image in digital form. The cheque itself is moved to some offsite
storage and the image is used for further processing.
Advantages
Cheque truncation truncates or stops the flow of cheques through the banking system. At
some point after a cheque enters the banking system, information from the cheque is
converted to a medium for electronic processing. The cheque itself is then stored (or
truncated). Further processing of cheque is done with the electronic information rather than
paper (i.e. the cheque itself).
Truncation can occur at the branch in which the customer deposits the cheque, i.e. the
collecting branch. The collecting branch truncates the cheque and sends the electronic data to
the clearing house or directly to the paying branch.
30.8 NOTE AND COIN COUNTING MACHINES
To reduce the n^ed of manual counting, note counting machines are available which counts a
bundle of notes placed on it. Loose notes are inserted into the machine. The machine counts
the notes at high speed, while simultaneously indicating the number counted on a digital
display. Every time the number
294
FIGURE 30.4 Ban;* ,»Uic wuunnng Machine
reaches 100, the machine stops, subject to it being fixed at 100 and allows for the bundle to
be taken out. This machine does relieve the drudgery involved in counting. However, one
limitation of this machine is that the notes have to be in fairly good condition for the machine
to able to count properly. However, the machine requires that all notes be of the same
denomination.
Similarly, coin counting machines are available. These machines act like a sieve, separating
the various denominations of coins into separate slots and also counting in the process. The
counting of coin is basically based on the diameter of the coin.
30.9 MICROFICHE
Periodical backup of the database is required to be taken in external media for data security
aspect. When the size of the data base is enormous, the type of storage becomes a concern.
We use data cartridges for such purposes but their longevity in data recovery over a period is
doubtful. For such ticklish data storages, microfilm or microfiche come in handy because
they can retain voluminous information and the relative inability to readily ascertain their
contents. Hence, it becomes necessary for any organisation to evolve stringent control
measures such as physical custody, maintenance, access, etc. to the media. The following
controls should be put in place for the protection of this media.
Disclosure
To procure greater security for highly sensitive information stored on magnetic media, it is to
be ensured
to encrypt the storage media containing highly sensitive information or to physically protect
the media
from unauthorised access or removal. To prevent the disclosure of sensitive or highly
sensitive information
on microfiche, it is advisable to attach labels indicating the highest classifications of
information that is
stored on a microfiche. This label should be clearly visible. {
Destruction
To prevent destruction or disclosure of information through unauthorised removal of storage
media, it is to be ensured that access to areas containing a concentration of information
storage media is controlled. In addition, consideration should be given to the use of electronic
article surveillance security systenls.
Business Continuity
To ensure the continued availability of the information stored on microfiche, it is to be
ensured that this mass storage media is included as part of the contingency and disaster
recovery plan.
Environmental
To prevent the destruction of information through loss of storage media due to
environ¬mental problems, it is to be ensured that adequate fire protection and environment
control is provided for the sites where microfiche devices have been stored.
30.10 LET US SUM UP
With the development of modern communication facilities, electronic payment systems are
becoming popular. These are teller machines available for bank customers within the bank as
well as outside the bank premises.
ATMs, which are being located even at the public places, are able to provide the customers
minimal banking services including cash payments round the clock. Shared ATMs are also
introduced in India where the services are provided across the banks. Customers need not
necessarily visit the bank to do banking transactions when their banker provides them tele-
banking or remote banking facility.
We have also seen that the various electronic and electro-mechanical aids that help the
modern banker to efficiently render innovative and novel customer services. We studied
technological aids such as smart cards, signature storage, and retrieval. Equipments like note
and coin counting machines mentioned in this chapter help the banker to take care of the
tedium in his task, reduce drudgery and at the same time efficiently discharge his functions.
These technological aids not only take care of some of the physical routine tasks but also
contribute substantially to efficient housekeeping functions and also render services that are
in tune with the customer needs and satisfaction.
30.11 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS
1. ATMs provide
(b) privacy in transaction (d) quick and efficient service
(a) round the clock service (c) anywhere banking facility (e) all of above
2. From the bank point of view the advantages of ATMs are
(a) alternative to expand banking hours
(b) cash handling and cash transportation is avoided
(c) alternative to new branches
(d) none of the above
(e) none of these
3. PIN is
(b) postal index number, (d) (a) & (c)
(a) randomly generated sequence of digits (c) stored in magnetic strip of the card (e) none of
these
4. Security features available with smart cards are
(a) multiple pins (b) retinal pattern verification
(c) dynamic signature verification (d) vein recognition
(e) all of above . .
5. The advantages of the processor smart cards are
(a) security (b) reliability
(c) longer life (d) all of the above
(e) none of these
296
6. Electronic purse may have following number of storage space
(a) only one (b) two
(b) sending cheque by speed post (d) (a) & (c)
(b) payoff the entire amount of card usage (d) all of above
(b) payoff the entire amount of card usage (d) all of above
(b) payoff the entire amount of card usage (d) all of above
(c) several (d) no storage space
(e) none of these
7. Cheque truncation can be done by
(a) using MICR data
(c) using image processing (e) none of these
8. The Credit card offers
(a) revolving credit for certain period
(c) on-line recover of amount of card usage
(e) none of these
9. The Debit card offers
(a) revolving credit for certain period
(c) online recover of amount of card usage
(e) none of these
10. The Charge card offers
(a) revolving credit for certain period
(c) online recover of amount of card usage
(e) none of these
11. Mobile Banking offers the following
(a) Withdrawal of cash anywhere in India
(b) Statement of account for a specific period
(c) Transfer of funds from one account to another account
(d) Balance enquiry
12. Transactions of Internet Banking excludes
(a) Withdrawal of cash anywhere in India
(b) Statement of account for a specific period.
(c) Transfer of funds from one account to another account
(d) Balance enquiry
30.12 ANSWERS TO 'CHECK YOUR PROGRESS'
1. (e), 2. (d), 3. (d), 4. (e), 5. (d), 6. (c), 7. (d), 8. (a), 9. (c), 10. (b), 11. (d), 12. (a).
30.13 KEYWORDS
ME, Imprinter, Offline ATMs, Host, WAP.
DATA COMMUNICATION NETWORK AND EFT SYSTEMS
STRUCTURE
31.0 Objectives
31.1 Introduction
31.2 Advent of Information Technology in Banking
31.3 Data Communication Networks
31.3.1 Components of Data Communication Networks
31.3.2 Modes of Transmission
31.4 Network Scenario in India: Major Networks
31.4.1 INET
31.4.2 NICNET
31.4.3 INDONET
31.4.4 BANKNET
31.4.5 RBI Net
31.5 Emerging Trends in Communication Networks for Banking
31.5.1 RBFs VSAT Network
31.5.2 Internet
31.6 Evolution of EFT Systems
31.7 Telex Communication for Message Transfer
31.8 Structured Message Transfer System Using SWIFT
31.8.1 Security in SWIFT
31.8.2 Developments in SWIFT
31.9 Automated Clearing Systems
31.9.1 Clearing House Inter-bank Payment System (CHIPS)
31.9.2 Clearing House Automated Payment System (CHAPS)
31.9.3 Clearing House Automated Transfer System (CHATS)
31.10 Two-Level Funds Transfer Systems
31.10.1 Fedwire
31.10.2 Bankwire
31.10.3 Point of Sale (POS) Systems
298
31.11 Development in India
31.11.1Electronic Clearing System in India
31.11.2National Electronic Fund Transfer (NEFT) System
31.11.3Real-Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) System
31.11.4Digital Signature
31.12 Let Us Sum Up
31.13 Check Your Progress
31.14 Answers to 'Check Your Progress'
31.15 Keywords
299
31.0 OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit, you should be able to:
• Explain the concepts of Information Technology and its advent in Indian banking.
• Describe the essential components of data communication networks and major data
communication networks in India.
• Explain the emerging trends in data communication networks.
• Describe the concept of EFT systems, their evolution and the essential characteristics
of the funds transfer mechanism.
• Describe the SWIFT operations for structured message transfer.
• Explain the various automated payment systems the world over.
• Describe the electronic clearing systems in India.
31.1 INTRODUCTION
The past few years have witnessed a phenomenal advancement in computers and
telecommunication technologies and their fusion has led to data communication networks.
This has largely changed the bankers' strategy towards the technology absorption.
Processing and execution of payment instructions is one of the statutory obligations of the
banks. Conventionally, paper-based instruments like cheques, drafts, dividend and interest
warrants, refund orders, gift cheques, traveller cheques, etc., have been the modes of settling
payment transactions. However, the use of computers and communications has now changed
the whole mechanism of funds transfer and the settlement process into the fast and automated
EFT systems. An electronic funds transfer differs from the conventional transfer in that the
information is processed and transmitted electronically.
31.2 ADVENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN BANKING
The extent of application of information technology which emerged as a fusion of computers
and telecommunications in the 1990s has greatly transformed the banking operations. The use
of computers and telecom technology are the main foundation around which most of the
banks are today building their banking services and operations.
There were the two successive committees on computerisation (Rangarajan Committees) that
set the tone for computerisation in India. The second committee set up in 1989 paved the way
for an integrated use of telecommunications and computers for applying fully the
technological breakthroughs to the banking operations. The comprehensive agreement with
unions in 1993 has, in fact, opened the floodgates for the banks to introduce almost an
unrestricted usage of IT tools.
MICR technology for speedy clearance of cheques in the four metropolitan cities was a major
step towards the automated clearing houses. On the communication front, Banknet and
SWIFT for transmission of messages were commissioned in India in the year 1991.
Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT) system now renamed as National Electronic Funds Transfer
(NEFT) system, Electronic Clearing System (ECS), and Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS)
systems have also been introduced in all major cities in India.
The foreign banks in India have been more aggressive and have also started their operations
with latest technology. A major turning point has been the birth of the fourth generation
computer systems. Coupled with this was the vast improvement in the telecommunication
technology and the concepts of local area network (LAN) and wide area networking (WAN)
of computer systems. Now, information technology is helping the banks to cross the
geographical barriers and take banking to the doorstep of the customers.
300
31.3 DATA COMMUNICATION NETWORKS
Data communication helps in drastically cutting costs and the time involved in transferring
data from the point of origin to the computer and information from the computer to the point
of use.
This brought about the concept of distributed data communication networks, wherein
computer systems with the aid of telecommunication links share resources at reduced costs.
The data communication networks have become an integral part of present day banking. Data
communication provides the connections to computers which may be located in
geographically dispersed locations all over the world.
31.3.1 Components of Data Communication Networks
Data communication typically consists of various data communication components. When the
components operate together for the sharing of resources, they are said to form a network. It
has three basic components.
/. Transmission Devices and Interface Equipment
The data is transmitted along the communication path between computer oriented devices
using electrical signals and bit sequences to represent numbers and characters. If digital
signals are to be transmitted over long distances, then the signals get deteriorate. To
overcome this problem, the digital signals are converted into analogue signals for
transmission over telephone lines. This conversion between the digital and analogue forms is
carried out by an interface device called 'Modem' (Modulator de modulator).
Modem: This is a conversion device installed in pairs at each end of an analogue
communications line (i.e. telephone line). The modem at the transmitting end modulates the
digital signals received locally from a computer or a terminal into analogue signals. It sends
the digital Js and 0s over standard phone lines as modulated tones.
The modem at the receiving end demodulates the incoming analogue signals converting these
back to the original, i.e. the digital format. Modems come in two types, one which can be
installed in the computer and those which are connected externally to the computer.
II. Transmission Medium
For communication between computers, the data has to travel through some medium during
its transmission. The prevalent technologies for data communication media are terrestrial,
microwave, and satellites.
(a) Terrestrial cables: Three of the most commonly used wiring techniques are the twisted
pair, coaxial cables and the fibre optics.
(i) Terrestrial-wire pair: A twisted pair consists of two insulated copper wires. It is widely
used
in place of parallel wires to minimise the risk of cross talk, i.e. mixing and distortion of
signals. These are useful for connecting terminals to computers up to a distance of 100
metres.
Because of the low cost and ease of convenience, these are most popular cables currently in
. use.
(ii) Coaxial cable: The coaxial cables consist of an inner copper conductor held in position by
circular spacers. The inner wire is surrounded by insulation and covered by a protective
sheath. The covering protects the conductor and prevents interference of signals. The cable
can carry digital signals at very high rates of 500 mega bits per second.
(iii) Optical fibre: Optical fibre has been a technological breakthrough in communications. It
supports data rate of 2 giga bits/sec. Fibre optics provide high quality (low error rate)
transmission of signals at very high speeds. The fibre optics transmissions are not affected by
301
electromagnetic interference. The transfer of data is through a very thin glass or plastic fibres
with a beam of light. The light source is a laser beam driven by a high speed high current
driver. These days, for security reasons, light emitting diodes are used.
(b) Microwave .systems: These use very high frequency radio signals used in telephone
systems and television transmissions. The radio waves are modulated to carry information.
Antennae are mounted on towers to send wave beams from one antenna to another. Along the
route, the received data is amplified and retransmitted. The microwave signals may also be
passed on to the communication
satellites.
(c) Communication satellite: Communication satellites are now becoming very popular
for data commu¬ nication between computers. The speed of the satellite in orbit equals the
speed of rotation of the earth and thus, the satellite is stationary relative to earth. The satellite
is fitted with transmitters and receiving antennas called transponders. It is used to link two or
more microwave transmitters/ receivers on earth (known as earth stations). The main
advantage of the satellite is that it is a single microwave relay station which can send signals
to a wide geographical area. Applications such as electronic mail, distributed processing.
Internet are ideally implemented with the use of satellite communication media. Moreover,
the broadcast is independent of the distance between the earth sites.
The networks, the satellite medium are the fastest and have no limitation of distance. In India,
Government agencies like NIC and VSNL are offering the satellite-based communication
services.
///. Transmission Processors
The purpose of communication processors is to enhance data communication between two
points. Communication processors can be broadly categorised as:
(i) Message Switches (ii) Multiplexers (iii) Front end processors.
Message switches. It is used for storing and forwarding data to a large number of terminals
over a single communication channel. A message switches receives data from all the
terminals, stores them in a queue and routes them, one at a time, to the CPU during
transmission. It also distributes messages coming from the CPU to appropriate terminals
during reception.
Multiplexer. It is a device that enables more than one signal to be sent simultaneously over
one physical channel. It combines inputs from two or more terminals, computer ports or other
multiplexers, and transmits the combined data stream over a single high-speed channel. At
the receiving end, the high¬speed channel is demultiplexed, either by another multiplexer or
by software.
Front end processor. It is a dedicated communications system that intercepts and handles
communication activities for the host computer. It is used to off-load communication tasks
from the host computer, thus freeing it to devote its CPU to processing application programs.
31.3.2 Modes of Transmission
The methods of data transmission for communication purposes are classified as follows:
Simplex: A simplex transmission is capable of transmitting data in only one direction. The
sender cannot receive and the receiver cannot send. Commercial radio broadcast is a simplex
type of transmission. This type of transmission is useful in analogue sampling.
Half-duplex: A half-duplex transmission allows data movement in both the directions but in
only one direction at a time. Modems, on a line, are a good example of a half-duplex. The
transmitting end waits for the response from the receiving end before sending another
message.
Full duplex: A full duplex commonly called 'Duplex' provides for simultaneous two-way
transmission.
302
The transmission is faster because it avoids the delay that occurs in a half-duplex circuit each
time direction of transmission is changed. Examples are the four wire full duplex modems
used on telephone lines.
31.4 NETWORK SCENARIO IN INDIA: MAJOR NETWORKS
The committees on communication networks for banks, set up in 1987 under the
chairmanship of Shri T.N. Anantharam Iyer, executive director, Reserve Bank of India, had
strongly recommended for the establishment of a cooperative communication network
especially for the banking industry.
Based on the recommendations of this Committee, a communication network, 'Banknet' was
set up in the year 1991 by the RBI to facilitate inter-bank transfer of messages within India. It
is primarily meant for the exclusive use of the banking industry and other financial
institutions and links seven cities, viz., Mumbai, New Delhi, Kolkata, Chennai, Bangalore,
Hyderabad and Nagpur through leased lines. However, Banknet has not proved quite popular
with the banking community because of the unreliable uptime of the links and limitations in
the communication software, COMET. In the meantime, the second Rangarajan Committee
had recommended the interconnecting of these branches and interfacing them with the public
data networks.
Here, we discuss some of the public data networks developed for the information processing;
however, these networks were not developed for the exclusive use of the banking industry.
Banknet and SWIFT are the two networks designed exclusively for the banks and other
financial institutions for their communication needs.
31.4.1 INET
INET was set up by the department of telephones in the year 1991. It is a fast, reliable,
flexible and quite cost effective data communication network. It is a X.25 data network based
on the Packet Switched Public Data (PSPD) technology with an error detection and
correction techniques. In the PSPD technology, data from each one of the sources is
fragmented into packets. These packets are first stored in packet switches called nodes which
are nothing but computers that buffer the packets. These packet switches, also route the
packets onto the appropriate physical links. They also have a built-in logic to detect
congestion or failure of links and to establish alternate routes for the packets. Packet
switching allows for dynamic rerouting of the calls (in case of route failure and congestion on
a particular route), and interconnection of computers/terminals at different speeds and
protocols.
INET allows both way connectivity to:
• Remote Area Business Message Network (RABMN)
• High speed VSAT Network (HVNET)
• Gateway packet switching system (GPSS) of VSNL at Mumbai
Typical Applications: INET is useful for the following applications:
• Electronic Mail Services • Corporate Communications
• Information Retrieval • Database Services
• Remote Login • Credit Card Verifications
• Electronic Funds Transfers.
31.4.2 NICNET
NICNET has been set up by the National Informatics Centre (NIC), a Government of India
organisation. It is India's largest Wide Area Network (WAN). The Master Earth Station is
installed in New Delhi, to provide access to satellites and operates from around 650 VSAT
terminals. Presently, it allows access
to about fifty networks in more than thirty countries. The access is both through leased lines
as well dial-up connectivity. It was set up primarily for data collection from 480 districts and
facilitates information management from geographically dispersed locations all over India.
Though, it has mainly been set up to serve the communication needs of the Central/State
Governments, yet banks in India have also been allowed connectivity and are using NICNET
for e-mail services. It operates on various backbones, viz., Packet Switched networks, LANs
and ISDNs.
31.4.3 INDONET
It was set up by CMC Ltd., in the 1980s and was among the first countrywide networks in
India. It has host computers at Hyderabad, Mumbai, Delhi, Kolkata and Chennai and access
points at Pune, Vizag, Bangalore and Ahmedabad. It is built around X.25 protocol which
allows flexibility in heterogeneous hardware connectivity. It can be accessed via dial-
up/dedicated VHF radio links. It also provides a gateway to INET for a wider geographical
spread in India and connectivity to other international networks like, Telenet, Tymnet of
USA, Telepack of Singapore, Datex of Germany. It has recently added fault tolerant
mainframes which offer high uptime and greater processing facilities.
31.4.4 BANKNET
After recognising the pressing need to harness information technology for intra-bank and
inter-bank communications in the 1980s, Reserve Bank of India commissioned the
BANKNET in 1991. This is a packet switched X.25 based network with nodes at Mumbai,
Delhi, Chennai and Kolkata, and a switching centre at Nagpur. In addition, Bangalore and
Hyderabad are connected to Chennai through remote connection/messaging facility.
User banks access BANKNET through leased lines at the respective local centres with
COMET (Computerised Message Transfer and File Transfer) software. The message transfer
utility enables 400 users to login at a time at each node.
COMET has facilities for message creation, deletion, editing, ascertaining status of messages,
listing and receiving acknowledgement, etc. It also permits free format messages of eight
lines of forty-eight characters each.
BANKNET usage, however, fell far below expectations. The main reason for this was that
BANKNET was far ahead of its time, in the sense, that a critical mass in computerisation,
change in work procedures necessitating the use of communication technology had not been
reached at the user end. The users did not, therefore, feel the necessity to make use of the
network resources. Coupled with this was the high rate of leased line failure of both the inter-
city and intra-city data circuits. The limitations of the COMET application software, which
did not permit file transfer was yet another factor.
31.4.5 RBI Net
RBI Net, a communication software, allows for free format messaging and file transfer on the
existing BANKNET infrastructure with the help of servers installed at the four metros. Each
RBI Net user interacts with the local server connected to the X.25 switch. The UNIX servers
in turn communicate with each other using TCP/IP over the X.25 protocol. The software
allows free format messaging without any restrictions on the length of the message; enables
file transfer (spreadsheets, data bases, programs, etc.), facilitates dial-up access, and has
security features, such as end-to-end encryption, audit trail, etc.
RBI Net is also being used by several departments of the bank for various applications such
as:
(i) Transmission of Sec. 42(2) of the RBI Act, 1934, data by commercial banks to regional
offices of department of banking operations and development (DBOD) and furnishing of
consolidated data by the regional offices of DBOD to central DBOD.
304
(ii) Press relations division daily news summary of important financial matters,
(iii) Department of economic analysis and policy macroeconomic indicators on a weekly
basis.
31.5 EMERGING TRENDS IN COMMUNICATION NETWORKS FOR BANKING
With the availability of more reliable communication media like satellites, the financial sector
is making more and more use of the networks for real-time online applications. In this
context, the advent of wide area networks like the RBI's VSAT network and the banks' own
networks are going to play a major role in changing the delivery systems for the banking
sector. Another significant development is the use of Internet for marketing the financial
services, which has still to make an impact on the Indian banking.
31.5.1 RBI's VSAT Network
As per the recommendations of the Saraf Committee, the Reserve Bank of India decided to
set up a countrywide data communication network for banks linking major centres of the
country. This network christened as the INFINET (Indian Financial Network) has been set up
at Hyderabad.
Because of the poor quality of the terrestrial communication lines in the country, this network
uses satellite communication with very small aperture terminals (VSATs) as earth stations to
ensure a reliable infrastructure. VSATs provide communication channels of high quality and
can be installed and operated in widely dispersed locations irrespective of the distance and
the terrain. These are easy to install and also provide for an easy centralised control and
monitoring of every single site irrespective of the distance. A large number of Indian banks
have already installed VSATs for connecting their branches/ offices in the network. This type
of network also provides a very high uptime of about 99.7 per cent.
User group network: VSAT network is a single closed user group network for the exclusive
use of the banks and other financial institutions. The system involves the use of earth stations
(VSATs) at different locations and a central hub station for routing data/voice/video
communications through satellite. The VSATs are owned by the individual banks and the
RBI. The hub is owned by the RBI and the Institute for Development and Research in
Banking Technology (IDRBT). This institute was set up by the RBI at Hyderabad to look into
the technological issues and solutions for the banking industry. The INFINET has since
started its operations w.e.f. 19 June 1999.
Satellite services based on VSAT technology can establish reliable links to all the sites,
including those where conventional telecom infrastructure is either poor or non-existent. The
central hub is equipped with a network management system which is, essentially, a powerful
computer to control the flow of network traffic.
Very Small Aperture Terminal (VSAT) comprises:
• An outdoor unit, which is a small dish antenna providing an interface to the satellite
• An indoor unit which is an interface to users' computer systems.
This network is a hybrid system of two different technologies (Star and Mesh). In the first
case, the VSATs communicate with the central hub. Here messages travel from a sending
VSAT to the hub via satellite and then from the hub to the receiving VSAT again via satellite.
This type is more useful for transmission of data and less of voice grade communications.
The second type which is useful for both heavy traffic of data and large amount of voice and
video grade communications involves a single hop from the sending VSAT to the receiving
VSAT via satellite. The pictorial depiction of the message transmission is given in Figure
31.1.
305FIGURE 31.1 VSAT NetworK iopology for RBI Hybrid System Supporting TDM/DMA
and DAMA
Applications on VSAT Network
Since all offices cannot have VSATs, an integration of terrestrial lines comprising fibre optic
cables, dial-up lines, etc., with the VSATs will provide connectivity to a large number of
branches/offices. A pictorial depiction Figure 31.2.
Reserve Bank has listed the following applications which can be used on the system:
• Anywhere/Any Time Banking
• Electronic Fund Transfer
• Plastic Cards Implementation
• Inter-branch Reconciliation or transfers like DD/TT/MT Advice, accounting and
transfer.
• Settlement Systems
• e-mail, circulars, corporate website for employees
• Customer database
• Audit and inspection of computerised branches
• MIS for credit risk management
• Settlement of securities
• Participation in money, forex, money markets, etc.
• Reporting to RBI
• Financial EDI-STP (Straight through Processing)
• Cash management system
• Software distribution and management
• Treasury management products.
However, to start with, the banks are making use of the INFINET for free format messages
and for exchange of information on cash management products, MIS for risk management
and ALM, reporting and reconciliation of DD/MT/TT or remittance, funds management,
circulars, etc.
It is expected that when fully operational, this network will usher in a new era of banking
services through technological advents cutting across the geographical limitations of
distances.
306
CHANDIGARH
GUWAHAT1
DELHI
LUCKNOW
JAIPUR
c
AHMEDABAD
0
KOLKATA
BHUBANESHWAR
VSAT Network
BANGALORE F^
lENNAI
PUNE
GOA '■.:
MUMBAI
KOCHi',
THfRUVANANTHAPURAM
kbps based line
2 mbps based line
Integration of VSA i with Terrestrial Network
NMSat Hyderabad
Infinet: Integration ui eased Lines and VSAT Network FIGURE 31.2 Design of Terrestrial
Network and Integration with VSAT Network
31.5.2 Internet
The internet is a global network of networks. It is a system of computers which allows user
computers exchange data, messages, files, etc., with any of the millions of computers the
world over having connectivity to Internet.
Internet has been around in different forms since late 1960s. Its precursor ARPANET was
originally designed by the US department of defence, in association with universities and
research facilities. In 1989, these networks created for military purposes were dismantled and
were replaced by NSFNET, the network of national science foundation and the infrastructure
for these networks was made available to public at large. Now, the Internet is available
around the globe to almost everybody. There are backbone computer networks, all over the
world, which operate at very high speeds and carry the bulk of the traffic. Other smaller
networks are connected to these backbone systems. Therefore, Internet is not a physical place
of brick and mortar but is an electronic link to the world of information through computers
communicating with one another throughout the world.
The information on the internet and the opportunities to use these are growing at a very fast
rate. Last few years have witnessed a phenomenal growth in its use.
The connection to the host computer of the ISP is established through the interface protocol
software. In India, following two protocols are available:
• Serial Line Protocol (SLIP)
• Point to Point Protocol (PPP)
307
To browse through the Internet, information browser software is required. The widely used
browsers are:
• Netscape Navigator ,. Microsoft Internet Explorer
Procedure to Connect
With the help of modem, the connection with the service provider is established. The access
is allowed after verification of the username and password. Once, the handshaking is
successful, the whole world of information superhighway is now available for access.
VSNL's GIAS Network in India
The VSNL has its main Internet access node at Mumbai. It is connected to the Internet node
at USA via satellite media. This node is also connected to the Internet node in Europe via the
submarine cable media.
The VSNL nodes at New Delhi, Kolkata, Chennai, Bangalore, Pune, Chandigarh, etc., are
connected to the Internet access node at Mumbai through the DOT provided intercity links.
The Internet access node of VSNL at Mumbai is also connected to VSNL's "Gateway Packet
Switched Service' (GPSS). Since, this GPSS is connected to DOT's 'Remote Area Business
Message Network' (RABMN), 'Domestic Packet Switched Network I-NET and high speed
VSAT network HVNET, subscribers to all these networks also have an access to full range of
Internet services.
Facilities over INTERNET
With the use of specially created web page(s), the banks can sell their products. Interactive
feedback forms can be designed and published over the web to gather customer information
and feedback on various services.
Some of the banks are providing online account opening facilities to NRIs over the Internet.
Recently, a new concept "cyber banking' has emerged which refers to the payments through
cards, engineered by purchasers/buyers of products/ services over Internet.
Internet Access Services
Some of the common services available on Internet are as follows:
E-mail: This is one of the most widely used applications. Messages can be sent to any remote
location. Messages travel in a matter of no time, without any extra charges.
Usenet: It allows sending a message/information on varied subjects on to an electronic
bulletin board for anyone to refer to.
Gopher: It allows access and retrieval of information on a variety of subjects, like reference
materials, magazine articles, government documents, speeches, etc.
File Transfer Protocol (FTP): FTP allows transfer of files from one system to another.
Internet Relay Chats (IRC): It allows access to forums where users can have online real-time
discussions across the globe.
World Wide Web (www): This facility organises Internet-related resources which makes the
information access quite easy. The documents are linked together. Anyone wishing to put
certain information on Internet can do so, by creating his own web page(s).
Internet Security
The only security for a user, against unauthorised use is the password. Unauthorised access is
checked only through its verification.
308
Another risk area is the range of potentially offensive material on the web. A user may like to
restrict his access to offensive web sites. Some of the navigators like 'Microsoft's Internet
Explorer' allow a certain level of filtering of information. This filtering is activated by a user
by setting security ratings to prevent access to sites that exceed specific level of offensive
material.
There is also a grave risk of computer viruses attached to free software travelling into user
systems at the time of downloading these softwares.
31.6 EVOLUTION OF EFT SYSTEMS
The use of MICR technology for processing of cheques was the first step towards the
mechanisation of the cheque clearing system, which later paved the way for introduction of
EFT systems. A committee on mechanisation of cheque handling, constituted by the
'American Bankers Association' introduced MICR in the year 1954.
In 1968, the Special Committee on Paperless Entries (SCOPE) was set up in the USA to
examine the concept of an automated clearing house. As a result in 1972, the first Automated
Clearing House (ACH) started operating. Since then there have been rapid strides in the
automated clearing house operations, the world over. With the extensive expansion of reliable
communication systems, POS systems also came into existence in the 1970s. Another
significant development during the period was introduction of SWIFT. By this time, banks
started using networked systems and ATMs. The final development in the EFT system has
been the private card systems like 'Visa Card', which employs an alternative payment system.
The widely adopted definition of EFT is given by the Section 105(5) of the Article 4A of the
Uniform Commercial Code (UCC) of the USA. Funds transfer systems means a wire transfer
network, automated clearing house and other communication system of clearing house or
other association of banks through which payment order by a bank may be transmitted to the
bank to which the order is addressed.
In this context, the EFT takes two forms - credit transfer or debit transfer. EFT system, as a
means of real-time funds transfer mechanism is now a well-established concept in all the
developed countries. The wire transfers, ATMs, POS and cards have become the largest
facilitators of EFT. Real time gross settlement system and cheque truncation is a landmark in
the field of EFT system in India.
31.7 TELEX COMMUNICATION FOR MESSAGE TRANSFER
Nowadays, the telex systems derive advantages of storage and processing capabilities of
computers for preparation and handling of tele-messages. These machines have enough
memory to store a large number of incoming and outgoing messages. Powerful utilities
support on the systems facilitates drafting and editing of the messages.
In the world of fast communication, telex is still finding its utility both in singular mode as
well in interface with other communication channels. SWIFT directly provides an interface to
the telex network and supports common procedures for handling of SWIFT and telex
messages. This also facilitates automatic dialling, redialling, message routing and group
transmissions. In India, most of the banks are using telex interface for transmitting their
upcountry messages to SWIFT through their main servers located at Mumbai.
31.8 STRUCTURED MESSAGE TRANSFER SYSTEM USING SWIFT
Society for Worldwide Inter-bank Financial Telecommunications (SWIFTs) was founded in
1973 by 239 banks spread over fifteen countries with an objective of creating a unified
international transaction
309
processing and transmission system to meet the ever growing telecommunication requirement
of the banking industry. It is a cooperative non-profit making organisation established under
Belgian law with its headquarters at Brussels.
SWIFT is wholly owned by its member banks. Swift is basically a message transmission
system. All the transactions are processed without the exchange of paper, bank note, cheque,
draft, etc., and as such is a true epitome of paperless banking. In India, all nationalised banks
are members of SWIFT. Bank locations are connected to the SWIFT regional processor at
Mumbai.
Main Features of SWIFT
• It is operational throughout the year twenty-four hours a day.
• Transmission of the messages to any part of the world is almost immediate.
• All the message formats for inter-bank transactions are standardised. At present, about
400 different standardised formats are used by SWIFT for message transmission.
• All messages are acknowledged (either accepted or rejected).
• Information is confidential and is protected against unauthorised disclosure and
tampering.
• SWIFT assumes financial liability for the accuracy and timely delivery of all
validated messages from the point they enter the network to the point they leave the network.
• Method of transmission is cost-effective.
Major Message Types
Standard message formats have been developed by SWIFT to handle the following business
areas:
• Customer transfers and cheques, • Financial institution transfers,
• Financial trading, • Collections and cash letters,
• Documentary credits and guarantees,• Securities,
• Precious metals and syndications, • Traveller cheques,
• Cash management and customer status, • Supporting system messages.
In addition, free format messages are also permitted, enabling any sort of message.
31.8.1 Security in SWIFT
The responsibility of SWIFT with respect to security of data messages is between the
regional processors. SWIFT does not assume any responsibility of the messages between the
regional processor and the banks. The security features in SWIFT provides for protecting the
network against unauthorised access and protection of transmission against loss or mutilation
of messages, errors in transmission, loss of privacy and fraudulent change.
Key authentication mechanism: The SWIFT authentication mechanism is an improved and
automated version of the telegraphic test keys, traditionally used for the authentication and
confirmation of amounts in messages between banks. It is automatically calculated on the
entire message text. This ensures that any change in the message text would be detected.
Encryption: Encryption is a security control to ensure data confidentiality. It is done on the
SWIFT network and is available to the users.
Checksum: It is a security control to prevent automatic changes during transmission. It uses,
as a part of mechanism, both the text and the receivers address.
31.8.2 Developments in SWIFT
SWIFT has helped in standardising and automating the international payments messaging.
SWIFT has also allowed its facilities to non-banking financial institutions.
310
31.9 AUTOMATED CLEARING SYSTEMS
Most of the large banks in the European countries and USA have their independent
communication networks. Other banks are also members of some of the network, on a
sharing basis. The banks there use distributed data processing techniques with a central
system acting as the main database server. This has helped them to provide certain specialised
functions like transfer of funds, automated teller systems, and credit card systems in an online
real-time mode. CHIPS, CHAPS, CHATS are some of these networked systems which allow
direct funds transfer facilities in the USA, UK and Hong Kong respectively and are largely
responsible for bringing about the true concept of Electronic Funds Transfer in these
countries.
31.9.1 Clearing House Inter-bank Payment System (CHIPS)
The CHIPS started operating in 1970, run by a New York clearing house, the world's premier
system for transfer of payments internationally. Settlement failures in the history of CHIPS
operation have never been reported and the operational time is claimed to be 99.9 per cent to
100 per cent. Most of the international fund transfers go through CHIPS, as most of the
international trade is transacted in US dollars. The financial transactions such as - foreign and
domestic trade services, international loans, syndicate loans, foreign exchange sales and
purchases, eurodollar placements, sale of short-term funds, etc., are done through CHIPS.
Domestic EFT payments are also made on CHIPS. The settlement of payments carried on
CHIPS is done through Federal Reserve Bank. CHIPS have dual computers at two different
sites with a high-speed line link. The participating banks are also required to maintain a dual
system with a dual link channel. To protect from fraud, full payment-message authentication
has been implemented. The CHIPS have a direct interface with the SWIFT system.
31.9.2 Clearing House Automated Payment System (CHAPS)
The CHAPS system set-up in the UK provides almost instantaneous service for settlement of
payments and the payments are guaranteed on receipt and cannot be recalled. The network
has been built around the most advanced computer and communication systems and offers a
guaranteed payment system. Major clearing branches are equipped with CHAPS terminals,
which allow payments to be sent to the system through several diverse locations. Its format
has been devised from SWIFT and the system allows direct transmission from SWIFT
system. The main system of the participating banks is connected to the CHAPS, which uses
the packet switched stream (PSS) for the communication network. CHAPS network protects
the high value payments and the messages by passing it through encryption and
authentications techniques.
31.9.3 Clearing House Automated Transfer System (CHATS)
CHATS provide the inter-bank funds transfer facilities in Hong Kong, which has long been
regarded as the hub of financial activities the world over. The success of this system depends
largely on the superb and reliable communication networks. CHATS provide same day inter-
bank settlement, instant online confirmation and enquiry facilities. All the inter-bank entries
are first validated at the point of entry before transmission to the CHATS central system for
settlement. All POS transactions are also supported and settled over this network. The
network can be switched fully to alternate routes for transmission, in case of failure of a
particular route. The integrity of message travelling over the network is ensured through
authentication and encryption techniques.
31.10 TWO-LEVEL FUNDS TRANSFER SYSTEM
During the past few years, Fedwire, Bankwire and POS have established themselves as some
of the major systems for electronic funds transfer and settlement facilities as well.
311
31.10.1 Fedwire
The Federal Reserve Wire System, in operation since 1956, is used by the member banks for
EFT and is the main funds transfer system in the USA. Presently, about 800 banks are linked
together over a computer-based telecommunications networks for transmission of funds and
statements. It is used primarily for transferring reserve account balances of depository
institutions and Government securities, high value domestic payments, bank to bank and
third-party transfers and corporate-to-corporate payments made through banks.
To carry out the functions of the Central Federal System, the country has been divided into
twelve districts/regions, each served by a Federal Reserve Bank and their twenty-five
branches. All the twelve banks put together, constitute the Federal Reserve System in the
USA. Each of these Federal Reserve Bank controls the commercial banks in its region. The
inter-region funds are transferred through FEDWIRE access is made through three modes:
• Direct access computer-to-computer connectivity for major banks.
• Direct terminal access through leased lines for online transmissions.
• Dial-up terminal facility for transmission as per requirements and needs.
The Fedwire is an X.25 protocol-based packet switched network and has a large number of
alternative routes for transmission of messages. Fedwire makes use of CHIPS also. To check
fraudulent activity, authentication and encryption procedures are implemented over the
network.
31.10.2 Bankwire
Bankwire is the pioneer private sector electronic telecommunication network, owned by an
association of banks in the USA and used to transfer messages between the subscribing
banks. It was originally conceived for reducing the cost of transmitting messages between
participating banks. It supports standard message formats through the telex network.
Bankwire also allows connectivity to its network to the non-member banks. The transmission
pertains to both funds transfer as well as administrative messages. It has started providing a
clearing facility known as 'CASHWIRE' that also undertakes settlement facility.
31.10.3 Point of Sale (POS) Systems
The POS system allows payments to be made at the point of sales by the way of EFT. With
the advent of cards, the concept of POS has become synonymous with the EFT Point of Sales
(EFTPOS). The system can handle not only the records of the sales, inventory level,
accounting entries and related functions of the retailers but also are connected to the financial
institution for effecting a transfer of funds to make payments. In POS, the retailer's terminal
is directly connected to the bank's network and the transaction can be communicated online.
The transactions can be processed in two ways:
Where both the retailer and the customer has an account with the same bank; First, the PIN is
verified, which is stored on the magnetic strip of the card and the information is passed to the
banks computer, which verifies that the fund is sufficient. Then transaction is processed.
When different financial institutions share the POS network, the transaction first travels to a
switching centre, which directs it to appropriate bank, and the information is processed.
The EFTPOS system is very beneficial. It benefits the retailers of reducing the cash handling
cost and a instant credit to their accounts. Banks get an excellent customer base.
31.11 DEVELOPMENT IN INDIA
The introduction of MICR clearing was the first step towards the process of automated
settlement. The Use of electronic media is one of the prerequisites for a true EFT system.
However the application
312
of technology in India is largely directed towards improving procedures rather than deriving
the advantages afforded by it. Now some progress has been made with the introduction of
ECS and EFT system in the country.
31.11.1Electronic Clearing System in India
The RBI has introduced a special variant of EFT in the form of ECS, which is an up
gradation of the paper-based payment system. Due to the absence of infrastructure, the
processing is not entirely based on the principles of EFT. It combines:
Electronic credit clearing: It was launched by the RBI in 1995, to provide an alternative to
bulk payment transactions passing through the clearing houses which has greatly obviated the
need for issuing large number of paper-based instruments. This system facilitates the
transactions which has single debit and multiple credits. The details of the transactions are
furnished on magnetic media for processing and the banks are getting credit data on magnetic
media duly encrypted.
Electronic debit clearing: This payment system works on the principle of multiple debits and
single credits. The consumers willing to participate in the scheme, give a mandate to debit
their account on receipt of a debit clearing advice from the debit clearing system and the
subscriber has an option to indicate a maximum limit for each debit entry. In February 1997,
the RBI introduced the ECS-RAPID (Receipt and Payment of Instrument/Document) in
Mumbai for payment of service charges to the service provider from the consumers. In this
system, a MICR reader captures the details of payments from a specially designed bill and the
schedules are prepared on magnetic media for onward processing.
Floppy input clearing: This is another mode of electronic clearing introduced by RBI in 1995,
for the clearing house managed by it. The participating banks submit their inter-bank claim
statement in electronic format on floppies. At the clearing house, this data is consolidated and
the settlement statements are generated. This is more accurate and fast settlement process.
31.11.2National Electronic Fund Transfer (NEFT) System
With the availability of integrated technology consisting of computers and communication
facilities, distances no longer remain a constraint in providing better customer service and
expediting the funds transfer mechanism. EFT facilitates quick movement of funds through
electronic media. EFT mechanism involving inter-bank funds settlement at the national level
has come up only recently as an aftermath of the recommendations of the Saraf Committee
on technology issues in the payment and settlement system constituted by the RBI in 1994.
The basic infrastructure at various branches/offices, at present, however, is not capable of
supporting such system, which is dependent upon sophisticated communication systems
integrated with computers. Due to these factors, the EFT system introduced by RBI is largely
built around the existing infrastructure for cheque clearing. The Saraf Committee had
suggested a hybrid system, both paper and electronic media for message transmission. It had
suggested that high value institutional funds transfer should be batched every hour. The batch
system has since been implemented in 1996. The RBI acts as the service provider as well as
the system regulator.
Reserve Bank of India has introduced a system called 'The Reserve Bank of India National
Electronic Funds Transfer System' which may be referred to as 'NEFT System' and shall
include the set of procedural guidelines detailed hereunder, for the participating banks and
institutions with the required computer system and communication network through which
funds transfer operation would take place.
Coverage
To facilitate quick transfer of NEFT messages, it is essential that only networked branches of
banks are part of the systems. Banks' own networks could be used for inter-branch
communication.
313
NEFT Characteristics
NEFT transactions may be made for amounts inclusive of paisa component. There is no upper
value limit for putting through an individual NEFT transaction. NEFT - Process Flow
The parties to a funds transfer under the NEFT system are the sending bank, the sending
NEFT service centre, the NEFT clearing centre, the receiving service centre and the
beneficiary branch.
Role of Customer
A bank customer (i.e. sender or originator) willing to avail of the remittance facilities offered
by a sending bank shall submit a NEFT application form authorising the sending bank to
debit the sender's account and transfer funds to the beneficiary specified in the NEFT
application form.
Role of Sending Bank
The sending bank shall prominently display at its premises the cut-off time schedules up to
which it shall receive the NEFT application forms from its customers. The sending bank
branch would prepare the 'Structured Financial Messaging System' (SFMS) message as and
when the application for the funds transfer is received and sends the message to sending
service centre, for processing /data upload.
The sending service centre shall transmit the NEFT SFMS message to the NEFT clearing
centre by using the communication network designated by Reserve Bank.
The SFMS messages would be transmitted to national clearing centre. Role of Clearing
Centre
The National Clearing Cell (NCC), of the RBI at Free Press House, Nariman Point, Mumbai,
will be the data processing NEFT clearing centre. SFMS messages generated for the banks
will be transmitted to the receiving service centre of each of the receiving banks using SFMS
after data validation at receiving NEFT Clearing Centre.
Role of Receiving Bank
On receipt of the NCC SFMS message, the receiving NEFT service centre shall process these
files and forward them to the destination branches using SFMS. Alternatively, the receiving
NEFT service centre may use the 'Straight through Processing Interface' (STPI) available in
SFMS and upload these SFMS messages to their internal banking solution directly, to give
the credits to the beneficiary account centrally. The beneficiary branches would make
payment to the beneficiaries instantly on the same day by crediting the specified account of
the beneficiary or otherwise placing funds at the disposal of the beneficiary.
Acknowledgement for NEFT
No acknowledgements are envisaged under NEFT scheme. A message that is not returned
unaffected before the next settlement day is treated to have been completed and credit
afforded to the beneficiary's account by the beneficiary branch. It is, therefore, vital that
unaffected credits are re-transmitted back as fresh NEFT transactions immediately.
Sender to be Advised in Case of Refund
If the beneficiary specified in the sender's payment order fails to get payment through the
NEFT system for some valid reasons, the sender shall be informed immediately after the
sending bank gets the returned NEFT. The sending bank shall also arrange to make payment
to the sender by crediting the account of the sender or otherwise placing funds at the disposal
of the sender.
314
Beneficiary Bank to Advise the Beneficiary of the Payment
After crediting the account of the beneficiary, the beneficiary bank shall advise the
beneficiary of the payments made. The statement of account, pass book entry or any online
messaging system shall indicate briefly the source of funds as well. In case of a holiday at
beneficiary branch, they have to effect the credit as on the same day or latest at
commencement of business on the next working day.
Settlements for NEFT Transactions
Every participating bank shall open and maintain in the NEFT centre, Mumbai, a settlement
account for settlement of payment obligations arising under the funds transfer executed under
the NEFT system.
Advantages of the NEFT
1. NEFT facilitates an efficient, secure, economical, reliable and expeditious system of
funds transfer and clearing in the banking sector throughout India, and
2. NEFT relieves the stress on the existing paper based funds transfer and clearing
system.
31.11.3 Real-Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) System
• RTGS is an electronic payment environment where Payment instructions processed on
a 'continuous' or 'REAL-TIME' basis; and settled on a GROSS or Individual basis without
netting the debits against credits Payments so effected are 'final' and 'irrevocable' settlement is
done in the books of central bank - the ultimate liquidity depository of the country. RTGS
uses the INFINET and SFMS.
• Each bank will be having a single gateway interface called Participant Interface or PI
for the RTGS System. The payment message/enquiry/ clearing settlement originates from the
participant's host system (Branch/Treasury).
• The message is passed on by the participant and clearing system interface (PI) to
inter-bank funds transfer processor (IFTP), which acts as a broker. Communication between
the PI and RTGS systems will be through IFTP only and not directly.
• IFTP stores the message and in case of payment messages construct settlement
message containing a core subset of the information required for settlement (settlement
message) and is routed to the RTGS System at RBI.
• On receipt of the subset, RBI checks whether the sending bank has sufficient covering
funds in its account and informs the IFTP of the status of transfer, queued or settled.
• The settlement message is processed and fate is advised to IFTP.
• Based on response, IFTP enriches the message received from RTGS system by adding
back the corporate details and sends settlement advice to both the originating and beneficiary
participant in case of successful settlement or failure advice to the originating participant in
case of failed settlement.
• Thus, the business information, which is exchanged between sending and receiving
bank, is not known by settlement agent.
• Thus, the RBI acts as only a settlement agent.
RTGS Business Day
The RTGS business day is divided into four phases:
• RTGS Open Phase - All normal transactions are accepted and processed.
. IDL Shut Phase - All transactions are processed as in RTGS open phase but no new IDL
will be nested . IDL Close Phase - Restriction on fresh IDL continues and no transaction
which debits a member with an outstanding IDL will be settled. . RTGS Close Phase -
Transactions reversing outstanding IDL will only be permitted. Outetand.ng
315
multilateral net settlement batch (MNSB) transactions for settlement (provided the member is
designated as a clearing entity) and MNSB return transactions are also permitted. • The
existing clearing system will also continue.
The phase change notifications will be sent by RBI to the members having the participant
interface (PI). Any changes in timing in these phases will also be broadcast to all the
members.
Future Perspectives
There are about 48,000 public sector bank branches in the country, of which over sixty-three
per cent are in semi-urban and rural areas. Though over seventy per cent of the branches have
attained hundred per cent computerisation, Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) is available
only in 23,500, while the national electronic funds transfer covers less than 5,000 branches.
Hence, integrating semi-urban and rural areas into the electronic clearing system was critical.
Hence, the coverage of the RTGS undoubtedly needs to be expanded over a period. This
would require up scaling of its operations in terms of capacity and speed, for which efficient
and effective transition to the RTGS system and its stabilisation would be essential. It is
necessary to explore all the issues in a comprehensive manner that would arise in rapid
upscaling of RTGS in our country.
31.11.4 Digital Signature
Digital signature is a new concept brought under the ambit of legislation in India with the
enactment of the Information Technology Act, 2000, which comprehensively addresses the
legal issues concerning the electronic messaging and the electronic payment system. The role
of digital signature is going to be important for e-commerce, because e-commerce heavily
relies on the electronic transmission of messages carrying digital signatures. It is a common
belief that a digital signature is just a digital image of a signature (hand drawn). In fact, a
digital signature is not the replica of the manual signature captured through a scanner or
otherwise. Digital signature is a key and must be applied in a manner to satisfy the following
critical features of any digitally signed electronic message.
Authenticity: The validity of the source of an electronic message should be ascertained
through the digital signature by verifying the source or the originator of the message.
Integrity: Integrity of a message transmitted electronically is of paramount importance. The
message has to be received intact and should not have been altered in any way during
transmission.
Non-repudiation
From the bankers' point of view, non-repudiation is very important to act upon a fund transfer
message. There should not be an opportunity for a sender of the message to deny that he has
sent the message at all and in the form in which it has been received.
The digital signature is unique to each message and any change to the message changes
digital signature.
The most common manner of signing electronically is with the help of the public key
cryptography as contemplated by the Information Technology Act, 2000. Cryptography is
usually based on the use of algorithmic functions to generate two different but
mathematically related keys (i.e. large numbers produced, using a series of mathematical
formulae applied to prime numbers).
There are two parts of the keys:
(i) Public key (ii) Private key.
Both keys are issued to the user by the designated authorities of the Government. Before a
sender can digitally sign an electronic message, the sender must first get a public-private key
pair. The 'Private Key' is kept confidential and is used only by signer to create the digital
signature. The 'public key' is used by a relying party to verify the digital signature.
316
One such key is used for creating a digital signature or transforming data into a seemingly
unintelligible form, and the other one for verifying a digital signature or converting the
message back to the original form. Encryption does not necessarily imply to make any
information confidential, the encrypted digital signature may be merely appended to a non-
encrypted message.
To sign an electronic message:
• The sender first delimits precisely the borders of what is to be signed.
• A hash function in the signers software should compute a hash result, which is for all
practical purposes is unique to the message.
• The signer's software should then transform the hash result into a digital signature
using signer's private key.
• The resulting digital signature is thus, unique to both the message and the private key
used to create it.
31.12 LET US SUM UP
The computerisation efforts in the banking industry started in the early eighties. Back office
functions and batch processes involving voluminous data were the first activities wherein
computers found their application. The developments in the communication technologies and
their application in data communication network have changed the whole concept of
information generation and its use for banking services.
Wire cables, fibre cables and satellites are the major media for data communication. The
satellites cover a wide geographical area for transmission and are hence being increasingly
used by the banking sector. Fibre optics is a fast and reliable terrestrial, but a costly medium.
Some of the public sector communication networks like INDONET, INET and NICNET have
also not found favour with the banking industry for its financial applications.
RBFs satellite-based countrywide communication network uses the VSAT technology
exclusively for the financial institutions and shall be used as a carrier for NEFT, EDI,
interactive transaction-oriented applications, etc. Internet is the global network affording
newer opportunities to the banks to market their services in addition to other wider
applications for general users.
There have been great strides in the field of EFT and the last three decades have
revolutionised the total concept of banking. Starting with computerisation of clearing houses,
instant fund transfers have now become possible due to the globally networked systems.
SWIFT with its well-standardised and structured message formats have become the
undisputedly most reliable system of message transmission for foreign exchange business.
CHIPS, CHAPS and CHATS are the automated clearing houses in the USA, UK and Hong
Kong respectively. Bulk of the funds transfers there are taking place through these clearing
houses.
In India, the concept of EFT has still to take its proper shape. The Reserve Bank of India has
introduced a variant of NEFT system which is a hybrid of the paper-based and electronic-
based payment systems. It has to take firm roots before a true real-time NEFT system can be
introduced in the country. Globally, point of sales terminals, ATMs, Fedwire and Bankwire
have emerged as the major systems of electronic funds transfers.
31.13 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS
1. MODEM does the following:
(a) modulates digital signals into analog
(b) demodulates analogue signals into digital
317
(c) converts data into image (d) both (a) and (b)
(e) none of these
2. A twisted pair cable consists of,
(a) two insulated copper wire
(b) an inner copper conductor held in position by circular spacers
(c) single copper wire
(d) all of these
(e) none of these
3. A coaxial cable consists of
(a) two insulated copper wire
(b) an inner copper conductor held in position by circular spacers
(c) single copper wire
(d) all of these
(e) none of these
4. In an optical fibre data is transmitted through
(a) a very thin glass or plastic fibres with a beam of light
(b) satellite
(c) laser beam driven by a high speed high current driver
(d) both (a) and (c)
(e) none of these
5. In a microwave system
(a) radio waves are modulated to carry information
(b) wave beams are sent from one antenna to another
(c) along the route, the received data is amplified and retransmitted
(d) microwave signals may be passed on to the satellite
(e) all of above
6. A message switcher is used to
(a) store and forward data to large number of terminals over a single communication
channel
(b) send more than one signal simultaneously over a single communication channel
(c) intercept and handle communication activities for the host computer
(d) all of above
(e) none of these
7. Multiplexer is used to
(a) store and forward data to a large number of terminals over a single communication
channel
(b) send more than one signal simultaneously over a single communication channel
(c) intercept and handle communication activities for the host computer
(d) all of above
(e) none of these
8. Front End Processor (FEP) is used to
(a) store and forward data to large number of terminals over a single communication
channel.
(b) send more than one signal simultaneously over a single communication channel
(c) intercept and handle communication activities for the host computer
(d) all of above
(e) none of these
9. A simplex transmission is capable of
(a) transmitting data only in one direction
(b) data movement in both the direction but only in one direction at a time
(c) providing a simultaneous two way communication
(d) data communication only
(e) none of these
10. A Full-duplex transmission is capable of
(a) transmitting data in one direction only
(b) data movement in both the direction but only in one direction at a time
(c) providing a simultaneous two way communication
(d) data communication only
(e) none of these
11. The upper value limit of an individual national electronic funds transfer (NEFT)
transaction is
(a) Rs. 20000 (b) Rs. 50000
(c) Rs. 100000(d) None of the above
31.14 ANSWERS TO 'CHECK YOUR PROGRESS'
1. (d), 2. (a), 3. (b), 4. (d), 5. (e), 6. (a), 7. (b), 8. (c), 9. (a), 10. (c), 11. (d).
31.15 KEYWORDS
Authentication, Data Communication, EFT (Electronic Funds Transfer), Electronic Clearing
House, Encryption, Front End Processor (FEP), Funds Transfer, Gateway, Packet
Assembler/Dissembler (PAD), Packet Switched Network, Payment Order.
UNIT
32
ROLE OF TECHNOLOGY UPGRADATION AND ITS IMPACT ON BANKS
STRUCTURE
32.0 Objectives
32.1 Introduction
32.2 Trends in Technology Developments
32.2.1 Data Warehousing and Data Mining
32.3 Role and Uses of Technology Upgradation
32.3.1 Data and Message Transferring
32.3.2 Corporate Websites
32.3,3 Management Information Systems (MIS)
32.4 Global Trends in Banking Systems
32.5 Impact of IT on Banks
32.5.1 Changes in Organisational Structure and Orientation
32.5.2 Impact on Service Quality
32.5.3 Impact on Human Resources
32.5.4 Impact on Privacy and Confidentiality of Data
32.6 Let Us Sum Up
32.7 Check Your Progress
32.8 Answers to 'Check Your Progress'
32.9 Keywords
320
32.0 OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit, you should be able to:
• understand the trends in information technology
• describe the concepts of data warehousing and data mining
• explain the new delivery systems of bank services and products
• understand the concepts of electronic data interchange
• describe the impact of technology on banking systems globally
• understand the impact of IT on organisational behaviour in banks
• describe the impact of technology on human resources in banks
• discuss the training needs of banks under the impact of IT
• explain the impact of IT on data privacy.
32.1 INTRODUCTION
Technology has, in fact, given new dimensions to the banks' service delivery mechanism, and
the banks are enthusiastically absorbing the latest technological innovations for devising new
products and services. It is in this context, that the conventional brick-mortar banks are giving
way to virtual banks from customers' perspective.
32.2 TRENDS IN TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENTS
The advancements in software tools, computer hardware and telecommunications have
shifted the focus of the banks towards computerisation from data processing to information
services.
The breathtaking advances in computers and telecommunications have enabled the banks to
adopt these technologies for banking applications to derive competitive advantages. There is
a marked shift in the technology now available, which has transformed the concept of branch
banking to anytime anywhere banking. The computational capacity of technology roughly
doubles every eighteen months. The trend is towards shared satellite-based communication
systems and networking technologies. The banks are adopting wide area networks inter-
linking their main branches. Providing interactive terminals to customers with the use of
multimedia is another phenomenon which is likely to gain wide acceptance. At the branch
level, the client server technology, use of graphic user interfaces (GUI) and interactive access
to information are the indicators of future trends.
Some of the large banks are working on the concept of having a very large data base system
for centralised storage of the customer information at one place. Another alternate strategy
being adopted by some banks is to have distributed data processing at different branches with
the updating of a central data base in batch mode.
32.2.1 Data Warehousing and Data Mining Data Warehousing
Data warehousing is the emerging trend, in the corporate world including banks, which has
been made possible by the application of information technology. Databases known as data
warehouses are designed, wherein data from heterogeneous sources is stored to generate
critical information for the decision support systems. The main characteristics of the data
stored in a data warehouse are:
• It is subject-oriented, e.g. in a banking environment, it may be customer-oriented,
storing all informa¬
tion including transactions of all types pertaining to the customer.
• It is integrated, and there are no inconsistencies.
321
The data in a data warehouse is non-volatile. The operational data is regularly accessed and
manipulated; a record at a time but in a data warehouse, the data is usually accessed in mass
and is also not updated (in general sense of update).
• It is time variant. The time zone for data in a data warehouse is significantly longer of
say five to ten years.
Data warehouse can be established even across multiple computer platforms as long as the
transaction details are made available to the data warehouse in a standardised format.
The Vasudevan Committee has also recommended that the Reserve Bank of India should
establish a data warehouse on banking and finance for the data collected under the regulatory
provisions.
Data Mining
Data mining is a technique to reveal the strategic information hidden in the data
warehouse(s). It is the process of automatically finding patterns and relations in large
databases. The patterns and relations can be:
• Organised into a concise model • Used to refine a previously existing model
• Provide summaries of large quantities of data
It helps in exposing the patterns that are critical to business and provide an advantage through
insight and knowledge of:
• Sound predictions of customer behaviour • Highly targeted market focus
• Maximised operational effectiveness • Optimal return on investment
Properly applied data mining techniques allow banks to capitalise on the investments made in
constructing and managing data warehouses.
Storage of data in data warehouses and their extraction through data mining techniques can
be applied in:
1. Loan risk analysis: To analyse the performance of a set of loans that have been
previously issued by the bank.
2. Credit risk analysis, by the issuer of credit cards using database mining to:
• determine whom to solicit as client, possibly with pre-approved credit limits
• determine whether to approve each particular credit card transaction.
3. Stock portfolio creation and analysis to analyse the performance of a set of securities
and fundamental data of the companies that issue the securities.
4. Data analysis of the demographic information about customers to help banks focus on
particular segments.
5. Risk analysis by insurance companies and banks.
32.3 ROLE AND USES OF TECHNOLOGY UPGRADATION
Technology has allowed banks to offer much more to their customers like the facilities of
card and telephone access, any time and anywhere banking through twenty-four hours
Automated Teller Machines (ATMs), credit cards, debit cards and POS (Point of Sale) access.
In fact, the technology has made it possible for the customers to have fingertip access to their
accounts worldwide.
The currents trend is towards home banking, fully exploiting the technological innovations in
the field of communications. Cyber banking leading to a cashless society is the direction
towards which the technology is driving the banks today.
The computers and particularly the networks, in a nutshell, are finding their application in the
fund
322
transfer/payment messages, inter-bank settlements, netting of foreign exchange payments,
inter-branch reconciliations, quick disposal of loan/investment proposals, FOREX
information among branches and offices, e-mail services, design of organisational/customer
databases, MIS systems and decision support systems.
32.3.1 Data and Message Transferring
The transmission of data and messages is one of the fundamental activities of any business
system. Whereas computers facilitate the processing of data, the communication technology
helps in transmission of the data. With the combined application of the two, embodied as
information technology, the banks are able to reduce the operational time in data and
information communications. A personal computer, a telephone line, a modem and interface
software is all that is required for breaking the distance barriers. Whereas e-mail has found its
application in sending unstructured free format messages, the newer concept of electronic
data interchange refers to the transmission of structured and formatted messages for further
analysis and use in business applications.
Electronic Data Interchange (EDI)
Electronic data interchange is the inter-organisational exchange of business documentation,
which can be processed by computers. It takes the form of interchange of standard formatted
data between the computer application systems of the trading partners with a minimal manual
intervention. Banks have been using EDI in the form of SWIFT messages. In India, Videsh
Sanchar Nigam Ltd. (VSNL) provides Gateway for Electronic Data Interchange Services
(GEDIS) worldwide.
EDI is usually referred to as electronic funds transfer (EFT). Credit clearing and debit
clearing are different forms of EDI, for making transfer of funds electronically. The credit
card network is another EFT system using EDI standards. Because the EDI is designed to
allow processing by the receiver without human interpretation and rekeying, the information
must be in a format that is readable and understandable by the computer. Electronic data
interchange for administration of commerce and transport (EDIFACT) is the universal set of
standards and guidelines for communication by EDI.
EDI Formatting Standards Provide Guidelines Covering
• The documents that can be communicated electronically.
• The information to be included in each electronic document.
• The sequence in which the information should follow.
• The meaning of individual pieces of information.
Communication Standards
The EDI guidelines are called communication standards and address such items as:
• The type of electronic envelope to be used.
• The transmission speed and the protocols on which the messages are to be sent.
• The time slots during the day which are acceptable for sending and receiving the
messages.
Electronic Mail
Electronic mail provides nearly instantaneous communication between different users,
regardless of the system they are using at their location, for any type of information
imaginable. Electronic mail has made the concept of the paperless office a reality and many
offices now use it extensively for inter¬office and intra-office correspondence.
In banks, electronic mail is used for correspondence between departments and offices and has
dramatically reduced the time taken from the use of the previous physical delivery methods.
Standard e-mail software packages also offer additional facilities like sending the same copy
to different offices with a single
323
command only. E-mail is basically used for transmitting unstructured messages. Banks are
also using the e-mail facility to transmit important data files.
32.3.2 Corporate Websites
Internet has opened new avenues for the banks to market their products and services. Many
banks are now having their own web sites on the internet as a platform for service delivery.
The banks are using the web generally for the following end uses:
1. Dissemination of information: Here banks offer information about themselves and
their products. Common types of information include highlights of the banks' financial
statements, descriptions of account products, loan products, card products, etc.
2. Financial advice: Some banks use the web to offer more general financial advice
interactively. As for example, the site may allow customers to answer questions about
themselves and their tolerance for risk, and give advice on how best to allocate their assets.
3. To highlight non-banking activities: Some banks use the site for giving details of their
charitable or community aid endeavours, or the events that they sponsor.
4. A node for commerce: Some of the virtual shopping malls on the Internet are run by
banking institutions. One such site is that of Barclaycard, the largest Visa issuer in the UK.
5. Selling financial products: Some banks are using websites to sell financial products
through the Internet. The common strategy is to allow customers to fill in an application form
for an online credit card and complete the transaction by more mundane methods such as the
post. However, it is expected that in future, banks may sell more complex products entirely
online.
6. Gateway to the Internet: Some of the banks are routing customer calls to bank's
website onto the Internet and thus, work as a sort of internet service providers to their
customers who are given proprietary software. The customers connect to the bank through
direct telephone link. Once connected, a screen appears which comprises navigational
facilities for banks' services including an access to the Internet itself.
7. Account services: The banks use the net to offer routine transactions such as balance
enquiry, transfer between accounts and bill payments. This is also one of the most important
areas in which a bank can use online delivery to serve its customers.
32.3.3 Management Information Systems (MIS)
The concept of MIS places particular emphasis on the availability of data and the ease, with
which it can be analysed and turned into meaningful information for managerial decision
making. Thus, the key element in any MIS is the transformation of data into information.
Another factor that assumes significance is the timeliness of information, lest it loses its
significance. As such, the system has to be such which furnishes the management with
current information.
Computer-based Information Systems
As a control mechanism, the banks including the Reserve Bank ask for extensive information
covering varied types of activities under various parameters. In a computerised system, with
the added advantages of fast and accurate processing, the data is expeditiously recorded and
processed for operational and control purposes, problems are isolated and referred to the
management for decision making.
The computer-based information systems offer following advantages:
Data is consistent and hence, the processed information is more accurate and relevant for
decision
making. Data redundancy is minimised, reducing a lot of labour in data reporting.
The computer-based information systems are more flexible and can suitably be modified with
ease to match the changing requirements.
324
These computerised systems not only help in the generation of a large number of statutory
and control returns, but also help in generating a wealth of information to aid in decision
making.
Several banks have also developed excellent management information systems, which
analyse their customer base and assist them in making more scientific decisions in areas such
as marketing and product development. Customer demographics, spending habits and savings
patterns can be monitored by means of advanced transaction monitoring systems, which give
account managers a more detailed profile of the customers and their financial requirements.
Decision Support Systems (DSS)
There could be situations requiring decisions which cannot be predicted. The timing, as to
when the need to make such a decision will arise or the nature of such decisions may not be
predicted. These situations are best addressed by the use of decision support systems (DSS)
which are easy to use, flexible and interactive computer-based systems designed to facilitate
decision making. These systems allow for the creation of simulations under various
conditions and help the management in analysing situations under different conditions. The
DSS provides the end user with decision- making information, when such a decision making
situation occurs.
The decision support systems provide the management use of query languages, ad hoc report
generators, statistical analysers, graphics, etc. They also provide the management with tools
that can test the what-if situations to pre-test the potential outcome of different decisions.
Spreadsheets are one such tool, which assists in testing of various situations. In simulations,
the DSS make use of complex mathematical models to aid decision making.
For example, the impact of any change in CRR/SLR requirements can be easily ascertained
to help the management decide on different investment options for available funds. Similarly,
in the competitive market, the DSS helps the bank managements in precisely generating the
information for pricing their products and services.
32.4 GLOBAL TRENDS IN BANKING SYSTEMS
Globally, the banks are recognising the need to embrace technology in the area of products
and services to compete successfully in the years ahead. In fact, the commercial banks, the
world over, are among the largest consumers of information technology. The banks perceive
the future of the financial services industry as becoming heavily dependent on electronic
delivery mechanism and are working towards bringing banking right into their customer's
homes.
Not only at the global level, but also in India, Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) system
has been thrown open to customers. In fact, the general belief is that the absence of these
services could affect the banks' ability to retain critical segments of their customer base.
However, as a strategy, most of the banks are targeting home banking facility at the top ten to
twenty per cent of banks' customers that deliver eighty to ninety per cent of the banks' profits,
and as such, are investing heavily to develop and market high-tech services.
There has been a noticeable tilt towards technology-driven products and services. Following
trends are visible in the banking systems:
1. Most of the banks are installing more and more ATMs for banking transactions.
2. To give the customers more choices for collecting their cash, the banks are resorting
to have non-
traditional branches such as supermarkets and video kiosks.
3. Telephone banking and debit cards are finding increased acceptance of the customers.
Credit cards
also find a significant usage.
325
4. The smart cards are currently offered by only a very few of the banks, but almost all
the banks plan to offer these in the future.
5. PC banking is another service which is finding wider acceptance.
6. Banks are tapping new sources of revenue and finding ways to differentiate
themselves from other banks and non-banks and are increasingly venturing into the fee-based
services like the:
• marketing of insurance and annuity sales • mutual funds
• financial planning • trusteeship services
Additionally, the following activities are also finding technology as an able ally:
1. Automated clearing systems
2. Customer information databases
3. Imaging of paper documents
4. On-line access to regulatory agencies
5. Use of the Internet and mobile for customer services
6. RTGS
7. Cheque truncation
Another impact is in the globalisation of banking services. Large banks are shifting their
focus away from the domestic market to the global arena, pursuing global expansion, and
emphasising those products and services that are globally oriented.
Technologies, currently being developed and tested, range from a new generation of more
sophisticated stored value and smarter smart cards, to the execution of commercial
transactions over the Internet. An alternative form of e-cash will soon develop which does not
require a traditional paper-oriented payments system by using technologies that will enable
such smart cards to transfer value through the Internet.
The technology has also found many other practical uses in Europe and Canada. Certain
banks are facilitating banking transactions through smart phones, which are sophisticated
electronic devices that can also deliver e-mail, carry out home shopping and home banking.
These phones have a built in credit card reader that provides access to these facilities. Banks
are using digital signatures for more secure banking transactions. The advances in technology
will also have dramatic effects on the payment systems. Globally, the banks are poised to use
technology that will gradually give new dimensions to the banking products, services and
delivery systems.
32.5 IMPACT OF IT ON BANKS
Under the impact of technology, the organisation structure of the banks, the role of various
functionaries and the approach of banks to customer needs are undergoing a perceptible
change. The technology has helped the banks to strategically look at customer needs to offer
newer and more efficient banking services, at the same time gearing its staff to cope with the
stresses of technology.
Here, we discuss, at length, the impact of information technology on the important
components of banking, viz., the organisation, the customers, the personnel and lastly the
data. Data privacy, involving individuals' rights and privileges about personnel information is
a very sensitive issue being debated and examined, the world over.
32.5.1 Changes in Organisational Structure and Orientation
Information technology is a means for increasing organisational productivity. IT, in fact, is
much more than a series of new machines for organisational efficiency, since it brings about a
new concept of self-regulating systems and principles in the organisation.
Some of usual changes brought about under the impact of IT relating to organisational
structure and orientation of the banking sector are illustrated as follows:
326
(i) The need for faster information and better control has a direct impact on reducing the
hierarchical tier systems in the banks. This has resulted in establishing a direct liaison
between the top management and the field functionaries.
(ii) As the technology helps in collection, processing, interpretation and transmission of
information, the need for middle tiers of management vanishes and more of self-managing
groups with autonomy and access to information emerge strongly.
(iii) The management processes and the controlling mechanism characteristics also undergo a
change. The decision maker needs to be vested with greater powers to cope with the stresses
of time factor. Several traditional jobs no longer remain relevant and several new jobs come
up.
(iv) Managerial attitudes also undergo a change under the impact of IT. This is reflected in
the way the top executives look at IT as a functional requirement and apply it for improving
organisational efficiency and effectiveness. IT helps in engineering a change of mechanism in
the overall orientation of the management.
(v) The organisational change can facilitate the increased involvement of information systems
in the mainstream product offerings in the banking and financial sector. In addition, to these
technical and organisational changes, a psychological repositioning of the information
technology function takes place.
(vi) In addition to the changes in organisational structure and orientation, the operating
procedures also witness a direct impact of the IT. The systems and procedures within banks
have to adapt themselves in accordance with the IT needs without sacrificing secrecy and
security.
32.5.2 Impact on Service Quality
Banking, which is primarily a service industry, has been, over the years, becoming more and
more technology dependent. The most visible impact of technology is reflected in the way the
banks respond strategically for making its effective use for efficient service delivery. This
impact on service quality can be summed up as follows:
1. Small and relatively new banks with a limited network of branches become better
placed to compete with the established banks, by integrating IT in their operations.
Technology is helping the banks
irrespective of their size to have a level playing field for pricing their products.
2. The technology has helped in commoditising some of the financial services. The
technology is forcing the banks to develop a strategy for an on-line delivery system to
broaden the customer relationship and to retain customer loyalty.
3. The depersonalisation can have a negative effect on relationship banking. The advent
of home banking fast changes the banks into shopping malls. This greatly reduces the
personal element in the services. It is an established fact that the human interface is the most
vital aspect of any service industry, irrespective of how advanced the adopted technology is.
A decade of computerisation can probably never substitute a simple smile or a warm
handshake.
4. The advent of IT democratises the information in the sense that bank customers,
particularly the corporate customers, have access to the same real-time information over
which the banks earlier had control. This results in greater competition for the banks. Another
competition to the banks stems from the advent of non-banking financial institutions who,
armed with technological capabilities, are vying with the banks to capture their retail
customer base. The advent of virtual banking in the form of Internet banking will remove
barriers for entry of these non-banking financial
institutions to compete with the conventional banks.
5. In banks, the technology pushes the delivery of services out of the bank and the focus
shifts from cost reduction to maintenance of market position. However, when properly
adopted, the technology helps in accelerating the service delivery to customers providing
control over account relationships.
327
Changes in Customer Aspirations
Today, the customers are demanding fast, accurate and reliable services. The customers
expect a reasonably high standard of services. The absorption of technology, therefore,
becomes inevitable for the banks to enable them to respond to customers needs at all times
and at competitive prices.
In the changed socio-economic conditions, the customers, individual or corporate, no longer
want to be restrained by the physical place where their funds and information are stored and
wish the banking facility to come to their home/business place rather than in branches of
banks. This has given rise to the concept of 'Anywhere Banking' facility which offers access
to banking services at a place and time convenient to the customers.
The use of improved telecommunication technology like leased lines, VSAT, etc., has made
unhindered information flows possible in real-time, on-line, and industry wide.
However, as the facilities provided by the banks increase, so does an increase in the demands
of the customers. The business compulsions, steered by telecommunications breakthroughs,
are putting tremendous pressures on individual banks to continuously evolve newer
techniques, for making business transactions better, faster and more efficient than that of
others. In fact, the technological prowess of the banks and other financial institutions are
likely to determine the future of how money and financial information will be transmitted for
satisfaction of customer needs.
32.5.3 Impact on Human Resources
Information technology has resulted in improved efficiency, innovative products and effective
delivery systems for the banks to help them succeed in the marketplace. In fact, the
emergence of new players in the financial sector has brought home the hard reality that
computerisation, as an exercise for modernisation, is now not a matter of choice but has
become a need for survival in the competitive environment and the bank employees have no
choice but to accept it or be left with the prospects of total organisational decay. The
technology has also brought about a visible impact, as discussed below, on the human
resources, which is the most vital component in the banking business.
1. The foremost impact of technology on the existing manpower is manifested in the
resistance to the new systems. Such resistance is not unique to the banking industry, but
stems from the basic instinct in human beings to view any change with an element of
suspicion. The fear of change gives rise to anxieties, inhibitions and scepticism, which can be
overcome only with the spread of awareness at all levels. These fears may be described as
follows:
(i) Job content: Fears, such as whether the technology will mean losing ones' expertise, or
will the personal skills will be adequate to meet the challenges of the new job, or whether it
would mean a change in the way one used to handle a job.
(ii) Job security: Fears whether the change will mean a loss of the job itself, or whether it
would be possible to retrain oneself in the new scheme of things, or would it mean a transfer
from the existing work place, or whether the new computer literate employees will have
better job profiles or whether it would mean a hindrance in the career growth.
(iii) Authority dilution: Fears such as whether the change in job requirements would mean
erosion in one's authority within the organisation, and would it be possible to continue
commanding respect.
2. Technology, when introduced in a planned manner, results in enhanced productivity
with better placement of employees. With the increased use of information technology, there
is an ever increasing demand of the specialised personnel in the fields of IT management
3. Another impact of IT on human resources is the high turnover rate of computer-
skilled manpower.
This may necessitate the banks to formulate their own manpower policies to retain these
professionals within the organisations.
328
In a nutshell, the application of IT affects the functional responsibility of every individual
involved in the organisation and proper training will help in preparing them for this
transition.
Role Transition
Information technology is a self-regulating system and its use entails a redefinition of work
which manifests itself in the following areas:
l.
2. 3.
With the application of IT, the job profiles and role definitions undergo a complete
transformation. With the shift of decision making powers to the point of information, there is
also a visible change in the responsibility structure in banks.
The increased competition, stemmed by the use of IT in banks, has underlined the need for
technically literate and managerially competent persons to help the line management
understand their own needs and build their own systems.
Training Needs
The most important element in this process involves the organisation-wise training for
attitudinal changes and skill developments, commensurate with the requirements of changed
role of individuals. Dissemination of knowledge about the new developments in technology
and its application is also required for the up gradation of skill levels.
In India, computer literacy, at the work force level is at a very low level. For a successful
integration of information technology by the banks as a business strategy, the training of staff
and the continuous up gradation of their skills is of paramount importance.
The changes in attitudes can be brought about if adequate information is provided on the
capabilities as well as limitations of the information technology tools. This can be done
through the process of training of staff, which can be broadly categorised as follows:
(i) Orientation and development of awareness amongst all sections of employees will help to
overcome the resistance to change and solicit cooperation not only from individuals but also
in overcoming organised resistance.
(ii) At the systems level, extensive training is required for persons performing the duties of
specialised positions, like:
(a) System administrators, to administer computer systems, and monitor their operational
performance.
(b) Systems analysts/designers, to analyse the existing systems and design improved
computer-
based systems.
(c) Programmers, to write computer programs.
(d) Database administrators, to design and maintain databases.
(e) Network administrators, to monitor and administer computer networks.
(f) Communication administrators, to set up and maintain computer networks.
(g) Computer auditors, to audit the computerised environments.
(h) Information system security managers, to safeguard the bank's assets.
The staff for some of these specialised activities may have to be pooled from outside the
banking area. Most of the banks have gone in for grooming their own staff for performing the
different roles in the IT environment.
There is a great gap between the demand and availability of trained manpower in the banking
industry particularly in the systems area. Some of the banks have formulated long-term
training plans to meet the challenges of intense competition triggered by technologicaJ
invasion of the banks. Some banks have already established their own training institutes with
the twin objective of designing training to meet specific end user requirements and also to
involve their staff in software developmental activities.
329
32.5.4 Impact on Privacy and Confidentiality of Data
The concern for the misuse of the stored data becomes more profound when the stored data
pertains to financial transactions of individuals. Customers feel threatened about the
inadequacy of privacy being maintained by the banks with regard to their transactions and
look at computerised systems with suspicion. Whereas inadvertent disclosure may occur
when a system crashes and the contents of a user's files get publicly displayed at a terminal,
the serious problem is that of unauthorised disclosures when a person having access rights
uses the data for unintended purposes.
Therefore, data privacy assumes two significant dimensions, viz.:
• the authority to access data
• the authority to use data only for specified purposes.
The following principles are broadly common in the privacy laws:
1. The individuals should be able to discover the existence and ownership of automated
personal data
systems and infer whether information about them exists in a system.
2. The data about individuals which is held for processing must have been obtained
fairly for a specific
lawful purpose only.
3. The data must be accurate, up-to-date and kept no longer than necessary.
4. The data collection on some individual attributes like racial origin, political
philosophy, religious
views, sex life details, etc., should be prohibited.
5. Special measures over and above the normal computer security procedures should be
taken to
preserve the privacy of personal data.
6. Data must be used only for the specific purpose and may be disclosed in accordance
with the
specific purpose only.
With the adoption of information technology by the banks, the issue of data privacy becomes
more relevant particularly in the context of transactions carried through the electronic funds
transfer systems and settlement taking place through RTGS system.
32.6 LET US SUM UP
Computers and communication technology has not only increased the competition among the
financial institutions in general and the banks in particular, but have also opened new vistas
for them to innovate themselves and come up with newer products and services. Globally, the
trend is towards using computer technology for designing customer need-based products and
services.
The information technology has a direct impact on the vital aspects of banks. All the major
components of a bank, viz., its organisational structure, the customers, the personnel and the
data evolve under the impact of the technology and react to the changes it brings about.
Information technology has stiffened the competition and the banks have come out with
newer products and service delivery systems. Training and retraining of staff and retention of
highly specialised staff have become critical factors for banks for successful utilisation of IT.
32.7 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS
1. The committee which has recommended for establishment of data warehouse is
known as
(a) Vasudevan Committee (b) Rangarajan Committee
(c) Saraf Committee (d) Shere Committee
(e) None of these
2. Data mining techniques can be applied in
(a) Predicting future trends based on information available
330
(b) Credit risk analysis
(c) Analysing demographic information about customers
(d) All of the above
(e) None of these
3. Communication technology
(a) facilitates the processing of data (b) helps in transmission of data
(c) enables decision support system (d) is a tool for data mining
(e) All of the above
4. Which of the following is the gateway in India for EDI services worldwide?
(a) Satyam online (b) BSNL
(c) MTNL (d) VSNL
(e) None of these
5. The universal set of standards for EDI is known as
(b) EDI (d) BIS
(a) EDIFACT
(c) ISO
(e) None of these
(b) financial advice (d) selling products
- 6. Banks can use a corporate website for
(a) dissemination of information (c) accounts services (e) All of these
(b) data redundancy (d) All of the above
7. Computer-based information systems offer
(a) data consistency
(c) flexibility and ease for modification (e) None of these
(b) adhoc report generator (d) graphics
8. Decision support system (DSS) uses
(a) query language
(c) statistical analyser (e) All of the above
9. Impact of IT on banks can be
(b) change in organisational orientation (d) change in customer aspiration
(a) change in organisational structure (c) change in service delivery channel (e) All of the
above
(b) innovative products (d) enhanced productivity
10. Information technology has resulted in
(a) improved efficiency
(c) effective delivery system
(e) All of the above
32.8 ANSWERS TO 'CHECK YOUR PROGRESS'
1. (a), 2. (d), 3. (b), 4. (d), 5. (a), 6. (e), 7. (d), 8. (e), 9. (e), 10. (e).
32.9
KEYWORDS
Compartmentalisation, Database, Fault tolerant computer systems, Graphical user interface
(GUI), Inadvertent disclosure (of data), Leased lines, Organisational decay. Static data,
Technological prowess, Turnover, Website.
UNIT
33SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS
STRUCTURE
33.0 Objectives
33.1 Introduction
33.2 Risk Concern Areas
33.2.1 Data and Software
33.2.2 Infrastructure
33.2.3 Peopleware
33.3 Different T^pes of Threats
33.3.1 Accidental Damages
33.3.2 Malicious Damages
33.4 ControMechanism
33.4.1 Physical Controls
33.4.2 Internal Controls
33.4.3 Operational Controls
33.5 Computer Audit
33.5.1 Scope of Computer Audit
33.5.2 Audit Approaches
33.6 Information System Audit (IS Audit)
33.6.1 Introduction
33.6.2 Objective
33.6.3 Controls to be Looked into IS Audit
33.6.4 Controls to be Evaluated in IS Audit
33.6.5 Benefits of IS Audit
33.7 Information System Security (IS Security)
33.7.1 Introduction
33.7.2 The Need for IS Security
33.7.3 Objectives of IS Security Policy
33.7.4 Controls Required for IS Security
332
33.7.5 IS Security in Banking
33.7.6 Threats to IS Security
33.8 Evaluation Requirements
33.8.1 Computer Hardware
33.8.2 Computer Software
33.8.3 Data
33.8.4 Communication Channels
33.8.5 Disaster Recovery Management for Computer Environment
33.8.6 System Development Process
33.9 Legal Framework for Electronic Transactions
33.10 Let Us Sum Up
33.11 Check Your Progress
33.12 Answers to 'Check Your Progress'
33.13 Keywords
333
33.0 OBJECTIVES
After studying this unit, you should be able to:
• describe the risks in a computerised environment
• examine the effects of these risks to banking operations
• discuss the various controls to prevent and contain these risks
• define the concept of computer audit
• examine the need for evaluation of various components in IT based banking
operations
33.1 INTRODUCTION
Banking operations have always been exposed to the risks of errors and frauds. It is
debatable, whether the application of information technology has changed the scale of these
risks but it is certain that the manner of risks has certainly undergone a change. So is the case
with the types of security and control procedures necessary to contain these risks to
acceptable levels. The successful management of computer and telecommunication risks
requires the employment of an effective system of controls within the banking operations.
This unit discusses at length, various types of risks in the computerised environments,
controls available to prevent and contain these risks and the approaches for evaluation of
these controls within an organisation. Lastly, the chapter discusses various components
requiring special evaluation as a part of computer audit for ensuring compliance to
management objectives related to the application of information technology in banking
applications.
33.2 RISK CONCERN AREAS
The customer demands have triggered a fierce competition amongst the banks and financial
companies for the application of computer and telecommunication technology in their
operations to help them offer innovative products and services at reduced costs. This also
helps them entering new geographical areas. The technology itself is highly self-evolving
leading to periodic inventions. Competition has driven the banks to experiment with
technology thus, increasing their dependence upon it. The quality of information technology
comprising computers and telecommunication systems, their application to evolving business
and customer needs determines the productivity of a bank. However, the risks associated in
use of IT and the deficiencies in security and controls within the banking procedures may
pose a significant threat to the banking operations.
A typical computerised environment constitutes of three interdependent but separate
components, viz., software, data and hardware. All these three components are continuously
exposed to computer operators, programmers, customers and even to the public. The nature
of financial transactions is such that banking operations can become vulnerable to the risks of
errors, omissions and frauds.
These risks are not specific to banking but are encountered in all types of business activities.
The risks broadly lead to:
1. Incorrect decision making leading to a setback to business.
2. Interruption in activities, due to the loss of data, hardware, software, peopleware.
3. Violation of privacy.
4. Direct financial loss due to computer frauds.
We discuss below the major components in computerised environments which require special
concern.
334
33.2.1 Data and Software
Data is a critical resource, necessary for an organisation's continuing operations. Incorrect
data can have serious implications on decision making, as well. The increasing availability
and use of expert systems and the potential impact of erroneous data on them can result in
playing havoc with the organisation's business. For example, at the operational level, an
incorrect interest calculation may result in over payments leading to financial loss.
A lack of control over data can lead to frauds by unscrupulous elements. Inadequate control
over data is the single largest factor which promotes the scope of frauds. Since, the data is
usually stored on magnetic media, in the absence of adequate control, any tampering with the
data cannot be detected easily.
Much of the information stored in a bank's computer systems or passed over the
telecommunication lines is confidential. In case it falls into wrong hands, it can damage the
customer relations, the reputation of the bank and also can give rise to claims for damages.
In computerised systems, a person may not have to move from his or her normal place of
work to access the information and there may be no trace of an unauthorised access having
occurred.
Similarly, unauthorised changes and modifications in the application software can directly
lead to frauds. The availability of utility software on operational systems can bypass many
controls in affecting modifications in the programmes as well in data. The errors due to
modifications in software cannot be detected easily.
33.2.2 Infrastructure
Banks have to invest heavily for implementing technology-based tools and solutions. In
addition to software and data, some hardware components are required for operations of the
computer and communication systems. Following are the major components of infrastructure
in a computerised environment.
(i) Computer hardware: Computer servers, terminals/workstations, disk/tape/cartridge drives,
printers,
controllers, modems, switches/multiplexers, etc. (ii) Power supply and other related
equipment like uninterrupted power supply units (UPS), constant voltage stabilisers (CVT),
generators, etc. (iii) Computer site including computer furniture, fire extinguishers, smoke
detectors, etc.
All the above components are required to be in the proper place for efficient utilisation of
technology for banking operations and are exposed to the risks of malfunctioning,
breakdowns, fire, obsolescence, etc., which may lead to interruption in services and/or loss of
assets.
33.2.3 Peopleware
Peopleware refers to the group of person(s) directly or indirectly involved in establishing and
running the computerised systems. The peopleware is exposed to the risks of:
(a) Stagnation in knowledge and skill levels affecting the efficiency of the newer systems
(b) High turnover due to inappropriate match of tasks with capabilities or on account of
allurements of
better remunerations and career. It affects the operations of the systems and the banks may
find it
increasingly difficult to get suitable replacements.
It is not necessary that a turnover of persons from within only may affect the organisation.
The banks are concerned with all persons associated with them in IT related critical solutions.
These persons may be the trained staff from within the banks or from the software houses
supplying software solutions to the banks. However, the direct impact is usually felt in case
of the above risks to the technical staff,
335
handling highly specialised functions, whereas in other case there may be a short-lived slow
down of services.
33.3 DIFFERENT TYPES OF THREATS
The threats to risk prone components in a computerised system manifests in the form of
business interruptions:
• Errors and omissions in data and software
• Unauthorised disclosure of confidential information
• Computer abuse and mis-utilisation of banks assets
• Frauds
Some of the threats to the computerised systems may be caused accidentally or due to reasons
beyond one's control. However, the damages caused due to malicious intentions and human
errors are of usually more serious nature.
33.3.1 Accidental Damages
Computers and communication systems have found their applications to be quite extensive in
banking and other financial organisations. However, at the same time, these systems are
vulnerable to damages caused accidentally, both due to human failures and natural calamities.
In the long run, the systems which have not been properly tested also lead to a higher failure
rate of errors in their processing and operations.
Environmental Hazards
Environmental hazards are one of the most common causes of accidental damage to computer
installations, equipment and data. Computer equipment and storage media can be put out of
action by natural disasters and improper management of the system environment. Following
are the major environmental hazards to computerised systems:
• Fire is the single most common cause, of complete or partial destruction of computer
installations
• Unstabilised power causes extensive damage to the sensitive electronic components
• Spikes in power and improper grounding (earthing)
• Excessive humidity, water seepage and floods
• Radio transmissions affecting data transmissions.
Human Errors and Omissions
Errors creeping into computerised systems may result in affecting drastically the customer
service and operational efficiency. Errors also dilute the management control of the systems.
Errors in computerised environment can occur at the time of:
• Systems design and process development
• Programme maintenance and while carrying out correction procedures
• Data entry at the time of terminal operations.
The cause in most of these cases is the human failure. Machine failure is rarely the cause of
errors in computer data.
The complexity of computer systems significantly contributes to the incidence of errors. Even
when programmes are well tested, errors can remain, that may lie dormant for months or
years until a particular set of circumstances occur. When this happens, the results can be
unpredictable. Often new errors are introduced during successive system changes.
336
Errors may also be introduced into standard software packages, when these are customised,
i.e. adapted to meet the needs of a particular user.
Excellent standards of error controls are, therefore, required to maintain the accuracy of
transactions, balances and management information.
Unreliable Systems
The quality of banking services and the efficiency of banking operations have become
increasingly dependent upon the application of information technology to the extent that any
failure in the planning or developing the proper IT systems may have significant commercial
consequences. As for example, a failure to anticipate the headways made in the use of
technology by the competitors may lead in development of inadequate and inappropriate
systems. To avoid these situations, the banks are required to pay a particularly close attention
to the planning of computerised systems.
Another aspect related to this issue is the opportunity of fraud which may arise because of a
poor system design. At the time of designing a system, the potential user, frequently defines
only half the problem, as he believes that the computer will do everything for him.
Particularly in a multi-programming or multi-user environment, it is very difficult to ascertain
what the system is doing. These types of systems are, therefore, prone to risks of error, as
well intentional frauds.
33.3.2 Malicious Damages
Risks of malicious damage to computerised systems can be from disgruntled employees who
wish to disrupt the services or from individuals with malafide intentions, to use the
technology for perpetrating fraud for financial gains. The systems are exposed to greater risks
from computer professionals and any unauthorised act committed by them may be very
difficult to detect. As such, controls are required to limit their access to operational
programmes and sensitive data.
Special programmes such as utility programmes can be used to make unauthorised changes to
computerised records in a way that bypasses the normal control and audit trail facilities built
into the computer systems.
Interruption in Services
Malicious damage to computer systems can cause an interruption in banking services. Once
the banking operations have been computerised, few banks can operate for long without their
computer systems. These systems may consist of large number of hardware components and
software programmes working in unison and damage to any one of these may bring down the
system partially or completely.
In most banks, a considerable proportion of these components are in one place. However,
with the extensive use of telecommunications, these components are increasingly being used
in an integrated manner at dispersed locations, making them particularly vulnerable to
damages, both malicious and accidental.
As the systems go out of action, the damaging effects on banking services increase rapidly.
Particularly, damaging effect is on the environments wherein IT is being used for on-line,
real-time processing. In such cases, services may get affected immediately, as the links to
automated teller machines, POS or other electronic networks are brought down. An
insufficient processing capacity to cope with the additional load may also lead to a
suspension of the banking facility unless adequate contingency plans have been specified and
tested beforehand. The consequential costs of a serious systems failure, therefore, can far
exceed the costs of replacing damaged equipment, data or software.
Backup arrangements can help in restoring the services. The protection of the bank's software
and data acquires utmost importance since the equipment can eventually be replaced. But,
where all copies of
337
programmes and data are destroyed/damaged, a very considerable time might elapse before
normal banking operations can be resumed.
Frauds
There are several ways in which fraudulent transactions in computerised systems can be
generated by unscrupulous elements. For example:
1. Special programmes such as utility programmes may be used to make unauthorised
changes to computerised records in a way that bypasses the normal control facilities built into
the computer systems.
2. An unauthorised manipulation to programmes or data in a way that bypasses the
password is to remove the relevant files from the primary location, transport these to another
computer and returned after manipulations. In case, this manipulation has been done on
backup files, these are brought to normal operation by deliberately causing a failure on the
primary files.
3. Unauthorised amendments may be made to the payment instructions prior to their
entry into the computer system.
4. Unauthorised changes to programmes may be made during routine development or
maintenance which may cause the programme to generate fraudulent transactions
automatically, to ignore control checks on selected accounts or to remove records of specified
transactions.
5. In networked systems, amendments may be made in transactions by intercepting them
during transmissions.
It would be observed that the causes that facilitate computer frauds are inadequate control
over data/ media, easy access to system, total reliance upon computer systems and inadequate
control over outputs.
Most banking systems contain control facilities and produce reports designed to assist in the
prevention or detection of frauds. These controls can be implemented by identifying and
protecting the vulnerable points in each system.
33.4 CONTROL MECHANISM
Implementation of effective control mechanism is required for successful management of
risks associated with the use of IT tools. Preventive controls stop errors or irregularities from
occurring; for example, good form design/screen layouts reduce the likelihood of making an
error while coding data or entering data from the source document. Detective controls
identify errors and irregularities after they occur, e.g. an input validation programme
identifies data beyond the permissible limit. Corrective controls remove or reduce the effects
of errors and irregularities after they have been identified, e.g. communications software may
request that data be retransmitted if it has been corrupted during transmission. In fact, the
objective of applying these controls always remains that in the first place the errors and
irregularities should be prevented from occurring. But given that these do occur, then there
should be a mechanism to detect these and correct.
It is, however, to be noted that security and control procedures cannot be expected to provide
absolute protection irrespective of their quality. There is always a residual risk of problems
that occurs affecting banking operations and their competitive performance.
The nature of controls also depends upon the timing as to when these are exercised during
data flow through the computer system and can be categorised as physical, internal and
operational controls.
33.4.1 Physical Controls
In computerised systems, the control of access becomes very critical in view of concentration
of information, at the site of data processing.
338
Control over access to assets, i.e. restricting entry to authorised persons only to the computer
room and allowing access to computer media, documentation and other computer
components, etc., to authorised persons/users only. Similarly, protection should be provided
against unlimited attempts through software techniques. Only authorised persons should be
allowed to undertake repairs/ maintenance of computer hardware with a proper log and no
access to data or software. Access to the system and a particular application can be controlled
through a mechanism of passwords. Personal identification numbers (PIN) or fingertip image
verification depending upon the system. Access log is also maintained to keep a record of
system access by various users. Another access control is not to allow any software
developmental work on the system earmarked for regular operational work to avoid risks of
errors and fraud.
Control over outputs, i.e. hard copies of all important reports generated on a periodic basis
should be preserved properly and access made available to authorised persons only. Routine
checks should be carried out to ensure that all protections, like smoke detectors, fire
extinguishers are effective and operational, and wherever necessary appropriate steps should
be taken. Similarly, protection against hardware failures should be ensured. Source code of a
running system should not be available on the system to avoid tampering.
33.4.2 Internal Controls
In order to check the accuracy and reliability of accounting data, ensure operational
efficiency, and safeguard assets, a system of internal controls are built in the computerised
systems. These controls also encourage adherence to banking procedures and managerial
policies. Primarily, there are two types of internal controls:
• Accounting controls • Administrative controls
Accounting controls are introduced in the application software and take the form of:
• Dual controls and authorisations • Validation checks on data
• Numerical sequencing, etc.
Administrative controls could be on the well-defined lines of responsibility, and formal
policies and procedures.
Some of the other controls applicable to customer accounting are:
• Validation of each transaction against limits and balances and its authorisation before
affecting it.
• Validations on stop payments, post-dated cheques, stale cheques and cheques with
invalid dates.
• Verification of sensitive parameters such as due dates, maximum/minimum days
allowed, maximum/
minimum rates, drawing limits, stop instructions, etc., before feeding into the system.
33.4.3 Operational Controls
These controls are embedded in software, whereas access controls may be enforced by both
the system software as well as application software at different levels. The operational
controls are usually provided in the application software to ensure data integrity, consistency
and processing. For example, verification of checksum and checking of file/database integrity
as part of day-begin functions are usually built in all banking applications.
Audit Trails
An audit trail is a chronological record of all events occurring in a system. This record is
maintained for tracing of irregularities and to detect the consequences of error. It also
facilitates the monitoring of the system. There are two types of audit trails.
• Accounting audit trail: It maintains a record of processes that update the data and
information.
339
• Operations audit trail: It maintains a record of attempted or actual consumption of
resources within a system.
Usual audit trails containing details of both the successful and unsuccessful transactions with
terminal number, user-id, transaction details, time stamp and authentication particulars are
generated by the system. As a security measure, this audit trail should be properly authorised
and particular care should be taken to ensure that transaction numbers are in running
sequence and no number is missing.
Checksum
Checksum is generated to ensure the integrity of data stored in a computer file. Checksum is
a number calculated on the basis of certain key data items of the file. In branch banking
environment, the checksum generated at the time of close of application on previous day is
tallied with that generated at the time of day-begin function on the next day. Checksum
usually involves at least, the account number, balances and names of the account holders.
Data Encryption
Data encryption is the process of systematic encoding of data before transmission so that an
unauthorised person cannot decipher it. The process employs an algorithm which remains
fixed and a keyword, which is usually changed periodically. To protect the integrity of a
message transmitted, a suitable error propagation code is used. At the receiving end, the data
is decrypted. End-to-end encryption protects the integrity of data passing between a sender
and receiver, independent of the nodes that the data traverses. Important information may be
transmitted randomly at intervals between common messages.
In the electronic fund transfer systems, a control mechanism which applies a message
authentication code (MAC) is used to identify changes to a message in transit. MAC is a
secret key applied to selected data items, in a part or whole of the message. MAC is
recalculated by the receiver on the basis of the message received. In case the calculated code
and the received code are not equal, it signifies that the message has been altered in some
way during transit.
33.5 COMPUTER AUDIT
Banks normally achieve effective, secure and reliable computer systems only through the use
of appropriate balance of different control techniques discussed above. The control
techniques selected, varies from bank to bank, reflecting the particular risks within each bank
and the costs of related security and control procedures. The objective is to safeguard assets
and use these effectively.
A regular programme of independent tests of security and control procedures by auditors help
in identifying lapses before the banking operations are seriously put to risk. The generic
organisational function aimed at evaluation of the asset safeguarding, data integrity, system
effectiveness, and system efficiency in computerised systems is termed as 'Computer Audit'.
33.5.1 Scope of Computer Audit
The computer audit covers:
1. Review of operations to establish if there is a compliance to the established policies,
standards and
procedures.
2. Review of the quality of formal policies, standards, procedures and efficiency of
operations and
the adequacy of procedures and controls.
3. Integrity review, focused at fraud detection/prevention, application programme and
operating system
integrity, system design and implementation strategy and monitoring of employees activities.
Within the above, functions like the data entry controls, computer operations, system
development, HatH communication controls, etc.. are covered as part of review.
340
33.5.2 Audit Approaches
Auditors are required to perform review of computer applications to evaluate accuracy of IT
processing. Computer audit approaches depend upon the technical skills of the auditor and
sophistication of the computer system being audited. The audit procedures may consist of
manual testing processes or computer audit programmes. These different methodologies are
termed as audit around the computer and audit through the computer. Quite often a
combination of the two is used. Extensive use of computer as a tool to assess the controls is
another technique adopted by the EDP auditors.
Audit around the Computer
In this approach, the auditor examines the internal control system of the computer installation
and the input and output of the application system. Based on the above, the auditor infers
about the processing carried out. He does not do a direct examination of the application
software and for him the computer is a black box. The normal assumption is that if the output
generated from a given input is correct and other physical controls are properly implemented,
then the processing through the computer is presumably correct. However, the systems under
scrutiny in these cases have to be simple, and:
• the systems should be using well-tested software,
• there should be a clear audit trail generated by the system,
• there should be proper physical controls and segregation of duties.
In all these cases, the auditor needs to examine and satisfy himself that the installation has not
modified the programmes at its end. The auditors having little technical expertise can be
trained easily for performing an audit around the computer. However, this approach does not
work well with systems that are complex in terms of size and volumes and the auditors
cannot anticipate any problems that may come up in future due to deficiencies of software.
Audit through the Computer
This approach involves the use of computer for testing of:
1. Logic and controls existing within the system, and
2. Records produced by the system.
For adopting this approach, the auditors require, technical competence and the level of
examination depends upon the complexity of the application system being audited. In the
following situations, audit through the computer is quite useful:
• Where the application system is complex and handles large volumes of input.
• Where the audit trail has substantial gaps due to cost considerations.
Usually, auditing gathers evidence after the application has processed the data. However,
there may be a need for collection of evidence on still more timely basis. In some of the
computerised financial systems, it may be necessary to take up computer auditing at the time
of processing for faster identification of errors, than through the postauditing techniques. The
method involves capturing of an image of a transaction as it races through the different logic
parts within a system. The technique collects evidence as follows:
1. Special audit modules are embedded in the application systems or the system software
to generate
the audit evidence.
2. Special audit records are tagged and the processing is examined from an audit angle.
Most of the computer systems can behave unreliably with large increase in the volumes of
data and changes in business requirements. In such situations, errors may come up, if the
testing had not been proper at the development stage. The audit through computers can help
in the identification of such errors at an early stage for taking remedial action.
341
Audit with the Computer
The auditors also make use of audit software consisting of computer programmes as part of
the auditing procedures to process data of audit significance. 'Computer Aided Audit Tools
and Techniques' (CAATTs) have evolved as one of the more efficient and effective ways to
audit computer-generated files, records and documents and to evaluate internal controls over
processing in a computerised environment.
33.6 INFORMATION SYSTEM AUDIT (IS AUDIT)
33.6.1 Introduction
Continuing from the above aspect of computer audit, the information system (IS) audit has
gained the importance in the context of accelerated pace of computerisation taking place in
banking sector world¬wide. Information technology is changing the nature of accounting
activities. The replacement of manual operations by automated systems has brought out
drastic changes in the banking operations. It has largely influenced the banks, whose
activities are largely in the nature of financial transactions. While the computerisation brings
in the advantages of efficiency, speed and economy in transaction processing and minimises
the risks and the opportunities of frauds, it places new challenges before the auditors in the
era of paperless on-line transaction processing environment.
This audit is carried out through the IT systems with the aid of 'Computer Aided Audit Tools
and Techniques' (CMTTs). CMTT is a readily available user-friendly software and various
types are used, with relevance to the purpose of IS audit.
33.6.2 Objective
The objective of audit does not change whether it is a manual or a computerised environment,
only the approach of audit changes. IS audit is a process of collecting and evaluating
evidence to determine whether a computer system could safeguard its assets (hardware,
software, and data) through the adoption of adequate security and control measures, maintain
data integrity, achieve goals of the organisation effectively and result in the efficient use of
resources available. A control is defined as a system that prevents, detects or corrects
undesirable events. An undesirable event is an event, which arises if unauthorised, inaccurate,
incomplete, ineffective or inefficient input enters the system.
33.6.3 Controls to be Looked into IS Audit
Control consists of a set of inter-related components that function together to achieve some
overall purpose. Control is defined as the policies, procedures, practices and organisational
structures designed to provide reasonable assurance that business objectives will be achieved
and that undesired events would be prevented or detected and corrected. Consider an example
of access control. Here, access control itself is not a control. It becomes a control only if a
system ensures that unauthorised person is prevented to access the system by means of
physical and technological-based controls like use of user ID and password and permissions
to assess particular database or application or part of it. All these components of access
control should be in place and effective. Thus, we must consider the reliability of a control
from the system's point of view. Hence, it is utmost important for IS auditors to understand
the nature of the controls.
33.6.4 Controls to be Evaluated in IS Audit
Each organisation should identify the events and circumstances whose occurrence could
result in a loss to the organisation. These are called exposures. Controls are those acts, which
the organisation should implement to minimise the exposures. There are four types of
controls:
(a\ Deterrent controls: Deterrent controls are designed to deter people, internal as well as
external,
342
from doing undesirable activities. For example, written policies including the punitive
measures may deter people from doing undesired activities.
(b) Preventive controls: Preventive controls prevent the cause of exposure from occurring
or at least
minimise the probability of unlawful event taking place. For example, security controls at
various
levels like hardware, software, application software, database, network, etc.
(c) Detective controls: When a case of exposure has occurred, detective controls report its
existence in
an effort to arrest the damage further or minimise the extent of the damage. Thus, detective
controls
limit the losses, if an unlawful event has occurred. Certain fire precautions like smoke
detectors
and heat detectors fall into this category. Even an IS auditing function can many times be
treated as
a detective control.
(d) Corrective controls: Corrective controls are designed for recovery from a loss
situation. For example,
business continuity planning is a corrective control. Without corrective controls in place, the
bank
has risk of business loss and other losses due to its inability to recover essential IT based
services,
information and other resources after the disaster has taken place.
33.6.5 Benefits of IS Audit
The IS audit assesses the strengths and weaknesses of the information system. It also assesses
if the information system actually translates itself into an effective tool to meet business
goals. Major benefits of IS audits are as under:
> It would identify the risks of exposure to an existing computerised environment. On
identification
of the risks, remedial measures can be taken to protect the interests of the organisation. Thus,
it
would act as a preventive tool.
> It would deter people/employees/users from indulging in corruption/ manipulation of
data, frauds,
etc., as any unlawful activity will be prevented, controlled and detected through
implementation of
IS audit.
Security features and controls in computerised information system could be improved-based
on the suggestions made during the course of an IS audit. Any laxity in controls/security of
the information system could be eliminated if an IS audit is conducted at regular intervals.
♦ IS audit can verify whether the information system safeguards the assets of the bank.
♦ It conveys to the management, reasonable assurance regarding functionality and
security related
performance capability of the system.
♦ It indicates health of the information system.
♦ Conclusions and recommendations emerging out of an IS audit influence the decision
making
process of the management.
33.7 INFORMATION SYSTEM SECURITY (IS SECURITY)
33.7.1 Introduction
The computer systems are at the centre of the information. The computation power, provided
by these systems, allows the organisations more flexibility and processing capability than
ever before. The complex array of computer capabilities offers operational advantages and at
the same time, raises security concerns as well. Checks and controls will require to be
implemented to protect the integrity of the computer systems which include, amongst others,
mainframes, mini-computers, microcomputers, laptops, notebooks, palmtops, servers,
workstations and personal computers in use in the organisation.
33.7.2 The Need for IS Security
(a) While the challenges related to physical security are those which can be confronted with
relative
343
ease, the position is much more complicated with respect to IT security. It is widely accepted
that security is as effective as the weakest link in a chain. The weakest link does not relate to
the components of technology (which do have an implication though), but on the person who
is part of the information supply chain, and is typically the insider in the organisation itself.
Studies have indicated that a substantial portion of the breach of security in financial
institutions have occurred on account of or have been triggered with the aid of internal
exposures or internal controls being compromised. Against this backdrop, the security
requirements need to be assigned high levels of priority.
(b) Information security is something which is best experienced than explained. With
networking and access to information being available at rates much larger than before,
information security is an activity which provides some comfort to both the policy makers
and the users of data.
(c) Security in payment systems cannot be addressed in isolation. It requires the
integration of work processes, communication linkages and integrated delivery systems and
should focus on stability, efficiency and risk control.
33.7.3 Objectives of IS Security Policy
In view of the needs spelt out as above for IS security, any organisation, the banking sector in
particular, requires a well-documented IS security policy having the following objectives:
To prevent unauthorised disclosure of information stored or processed on the bank's
information systems (CONFIDENTIALITY) . To prevent the accidental or unauthorised
deliberate alteration or deletion of information (INTEGRITY) S To ensure that information
is available to authorised persons when required (AVAILABILITY).
The guidelines carved out of the aforesaid aspects, shall be drawn as the yardstick to assess
the level of IS security compliance. Each activity mentioned below shall be evaluated in
terms of risk parameters by the officials drafted for inspection of compliance to the Policy
guidelines. Depending upon the severity of the risk vis-a-vis the compliance noticed, the
LOW or MEDIUM or HIGH or EXTREMELY HIGH grades will be assigned and the
findings will be put up to the top governing body of the organisation. The activity pursued to
evaluate IS security guidelines is known as information system audit (IS audit).
33.7.4 Controls Required for IS Security
User ID and Password: The common level of entry is the use of validation of authorised
access (in the form of authorised user-Ids) to be further authenticated by correctness of
passwords keyed in by the authorised users.
Authorisation: Authorisation of users is another activity that needs to be closely regulated and
monitored.
Access Control: Access to databases in computer systems and to the data contained therein
have to be strictly restricted
Alternate authentication control: To have more control on the access being given to the
genuine users alone, biometrics is interpolated in all access cards to identify the correct user
based on some physical characteristic, such as fingerprint analysis, hand geometry, or retina
scanning. This technology is advancing rapidly, and offers an alternative means to
authenticate a user.
Strengthening of controls in the modern financial transactions: Financial messages in the
form of plain text, encrypted messages, SFMS are used to convey transfer of funds. For such
transactions, it would be advisable to build the following security features at the application
level, because of the critical nature of financial data transfer.
344
(a) Authentication (to verify the identity of the sender of the message to the intended
recipient to prevent spoofing or impersonation)
(b) Authorisation (to control the access to specific resources for unauthorised persons)
(c) Confidentiality (to maintain the secrecy of the content of transmission between the
authorized parties)
(d) Integrity (to ensure that no changes/errors are introduced in the messages during
transmission)
(e) Non-repudiation (to ensure that an entity cannot later deny the origin and receipt and
contents of the communication).
33.7.5 IS Security in Banking
Customers of banks can now look forward to a large array of new offerings by banks. From
an era of mere competition, banks are now cooperating among themselves so that the
synergistic benefits are shared among all the players. This would result in the formation of
shared payment networks (a few shared ATM networks have already been commissioned by
banks), offering payment services beyond the existing time zones.
The Reserve Bank is also facilitating new projects such as the multi-application smart card
project which, when implemented, would facilitate transfer of funds using electronic means
and in a safe and secure manner across the length and breadth of the country, with reduced
dependence on paper currency. The opportunities of e-banking or e-power in general need to
be harnessed so that banking is available to all customers in such a manner that they would
feel most convenient and if required, without having to visit a branch of a bank. All these will
have to be accompanied with a high level of comfort, which again boils down to the issue of
IS security.
33.7.6 Threats to IS Security
As increasing dependence on information systems develops, the need for such systems to be
reliable and secure also becomes more essential. As growing numbers of ordinary citizens use
computer networks for banking, shopping, etc., network security is potentially a massive
problem. Over the last few years, the need for computer and information system security has
become increasingly evident.
(a) as web sites are being defaced with greater frequency,
(b) more and more denial-of-service attacks are being reported, credit card information is
being stolen,
(c) there is increased sophistication of hacking tools that are openly available to the
public on the Internet, and
(d) there is increasing damage being caused by viruses and worms to critical information
system resources.
It would be helpful if the organisations share information about threats and vulnerabilities,
and implement procedures for rapid and effective cooperation to prevent, detect and respond
to security incidents. As new threats and vulnerabilities are continuously discovered, there is
a strong need for cooperation among organisations and, if necessary, to consider cross-border
information sharing.
E-mail Viruses
Antivirus software should be installed to scan any attachment before opening it. Users should
not open e-mail attachments unless they are sure about its contents and they know their
senders well.
Phishing Attacks
Phishing is a recent forms of cyber attack in which scammers/attackers make the Internet
users divulge sensitive information about their bank accounts and personal details. The tactic
of using e-mail to solicit sensitive information from users is called phishing. The attackers are
able to target Internet users due to some inherent weakness in web browsers and other
technical aspects of the Internet.
345
E-mail can be used to obtain sensitive information from unsuspecting users. The information
may be passwords for websites, credit card information, and online financial information
such as bank account numbers.
In a typical attack, user receives an e-mail message from the attacker with the address and
logo or image of a bank or financial institution, making one to believe that the message has
come from that bank/financial institution which tries to convince the user to part with
personal information and use them for wrongful purposes.
The aforesaid threats can be warded-off by maintaining an ongoing study of the IS security
requirements in the light of hardware/software/communication equipments deployment.
1. IS security assessment: The security assessment must include the following aspects
for putting in place a comprehensive policy document:
(i) To understand threats and dangers that could be vulnerable to and the steps that need to be
taken to mitigate these vulnerabilities (ii) To understand access control systems and
methodology, telecommunication and network
security, and security management practice (iii) To deploy personnel well versed in the area
of application and systems development security, cryptography, operations security and
physical security
2. Firewalls for data integrity: At the minimum, organisations should use the proxy
server type of firewall so that there is no direct connection between the Internet and their
system. It facilitates a high level of control and in-depth monitoring using logging and
auditing tools. For sensitive systems, a stateful inspection firewall is recommended which
thoroughly inspects all packets of information,
and the past and present transactions are compared. These generally include a real-time
security alert.
3. Change management of computer hardware and software: This is another aspect that
needs to be viewed from the security angle. Hardware needs to be specified with vital
security features and the controls are of high order even when updating to the system is done.
Software undergoes frequent updating and version control and levels of software in use
across offices is an issue which needs to be examined in its totality for practicable
implementation.
Greater thought is to be given to all the issues connected with actual implementation of IS
security. The security is actually not built over any existing block; in today's world, it has to
be an integral part of the block itself. This is where the need for implementation of IS security
from the stage of manufacture - of the hardware, software, during its integration and final
implementation - assumes significance. In this context, putting in place a rigid IS security
policy and ensuring its compliance is the only option for all risk mitigation measures.
33.8 EVALUATION REQUIREMENTS
The IT resources continuously undergo changes in the form of development of new
applications, acquisition of new hardware, turnover of trained employees, etc. Therefore,
there is a need for a standard plan of evaluation of various IT components, viz., feasibility
studies, specification of systems requirements, selection of equipment, software
development/acquisitions and project controls, etc., on a continuous basis. Lack of attention
to one or more of these aspects can lead to serious developmental delays, increased costs and
failures in computer projects.
Apart from regular audit checks on existing systems, auditors' involvement at an early stage
in the specification and design of new systems can contribute significantly to not only the
quality and effectiveness of security and control facilities but also a more efficient utilisation
of computer resources.
346
33.8.1 Computer Hardware
Obsolescence of computer hardware is a major problem with IT users. Acquisition and
replacement costs are quite high. Therefore, the banks need to have proper hardware purchase
policies directed at a balance between technology and cost of acquiring it. The components of
the existing systems to replace damaged parts may not be available with ease and the banks
may have to phase out the hardware gradually. Moreover, the competition may drive the
banks to adopt the latest technology without bothering about the costs involved. All this
requires for a proper long-term plan and budget for hardware replacements. It is to be noted
that in case where it is difficult to replace some hardware, the losses due to denial of services
to customers may lead to loss of goodwill and reputation. In case where the hardware can be
replaced immediately, the loss may be in terms of cost of replacement. Therefore, an
evaluation of various assets and the manner in which these are being used should be done on
periodic basis.
33.8.2 Computer Software
Software, comprising both the application software and system software, is vital to the
operations of a computerised system. The system software comprising operating systems,
compilers, utilities, etc., have to be objectively procured to drive the software applications for
meeting banking needs. Vendor policies and technological breakthroughs result in
development and availability of newer software directed at efficient utilisation of the
hardware. It changes the quality of banking products and methods of service delivery. As for
example, the banks are making a shift from TBA to networked online centralised banking
solutions (CBS).
Application software also undergoes change with the passage of time to conform to changed
banking requirements. Frequent changes to the application software result in its patching
which makes the system less efficient, requiring a fresh development of software. All this
requires a proper change management policy for software.
33.8.3 Data
Information is the power source of the banking business. The data in its various forms is one
of the most critical assets of a bank. Accidental loss of data may be less serious than the loss
due to irregularities. Whereas a customer file destructed accidentally may still be recovered,
the problem assumes seriousness if it is stolen by a competitor and may be used against it.
The application of technology has also changed the concept of data storage and data retrieval
techniques. Any changes to the banking data stored on magnetic media may not be easily
detected. This underlines the need for proper management policies for data storage, and the
archival methods for ensuring protection, security, and privacy of data.
33.8.4 Communication Channels
Banking operations now make extensive use of communication channels for data
transmission. The banking framework has geographically spread out with linkages being
established through communication lines. In fact, the communication systems are the
backbone of electronic banking which is spreading at enormous speed. It calls for a well-
defined technological competence and clear policies for absorption of the right type of
communication systems for individual bank's needs. Associated with it, is the risk of the
tapping of data over the telecommunication channels as well the need of building secured
methods of transmitting financial transactions.
33.8.5 Disaster Recovery Management for Computer Environment
Objective
• The main objective of the disaster recovery policy is to safeguard Information.
347
• System assets with least damage in case of any disaster and to maintain business
continuity at the optimum level within the shortest possible time.
Disaster - Definition
In simple terms, any event which results in direct denial or stoppage of essential business
functions for a considerable period of time may be defined as a disaster.
Before defining and declaring any event as a disaster, it must be ensured that the event results
in direct stoppage of business, resulting in loss that can be quantified either in terms of
money or time. For instance, stoppage of services after business hours without disrupting
customer service at any point of time, disruption in services for short intervals, etc., that do
not result in denial of service need not be considered as a disaster and it can be considered as
disruption. Thus, a judicious decision must be arrived at in this regard.
Business Impact Analysis
Before devising any disaster recovery plan, a complete business impact analysis (BIA), must
be carried out by the functional units to identify the critical areas and systems affecting the
business based broadly on the lines of the business continuity plan, the maximum time up to
which services/business can be stopped, the minimum time within which the services can be
restored either directly or through backup mechanisms, the lead time between complaint and
response with vendors etc. Wherever the loss can be quantified, the value of the impact can
be calculated and a comparison with past occurrences/standards and recovery time objective
and recovery point objective can be arrived at.
Disaster Recovery Planning
Information is a crucial aspect of businesses all over the world. However, the organisations
are vulnerable to threats of different kinds that can destroy information and sever links of
communication. The following are some such threats:
(i) Natural disasters, such as fire and earthquake (External factors)
(ii) Hardware and software failures
(iii) Virus attack
(iv) Acts of terrorism
To counter these disasters with the minimum possible disruption to business operations and
loss of valuable data, organisations must plan beforehand. In addition, an organisation must
constantly monitor the environment for threats to the assets of the organisation. After these
potential threats are identified, the organisation must analyse whether the safeguards
currently in place are sufficient to mitigate the risk posed by the threats. If the safeguards are
insufficient, the organisation must consider implementing additional safeguards.
Need for Disaster Recovery Planning
Disasters arising out of external factors such as earthquakes can significantly damage the
equipment, systems, and data of an organisation and inflict huge financial losses. Therefore,
organisations must plan for disasters to ensure that they can successfully recover from them.
The process of planning for disaster recovery is divided into four phases as shown in Figure
33.1.
Awareness
Preparation
Testing
Recovery
348
Awareness
To create a disaster recovery plan, the awareness about the critical activities, systems and
processes of the organisation must be of the highest order. Financial services oriented
organisations like banks must sustain critical business activities and systems even at the cost
of less important activities. The back-end processes in banks may be treated as less important,
while the front-end operations must be identified as the critical business activities. Then the
resources, viz., trained manpower, infrastructure like electricity, furniture, computer
hardware, communication equipment and links etc., that are necessary for sustaining these
activities must be identified and kept ready for commissioning at very short notice. In
addition to these, the financial and legal issues as detailed below are also to be considered.
Financial and Legal Issues
All the information assets carry a monetary value and any loss to these assets will in turn
influence the profit and loss of the institution. Thus, it becomes mandatory for any unit
holding the Information assets to maintain;
(a) A proper inventory of all the hardware, software and other equipments, data storage
devices, etc., and to insure against any loss to these assets.
(b) The warranty/AMC terms and conditions must be properly documented, filed and
secured in safe custody with due knowledge of the persons concerned.
(c) Only licensed versions of the software for use as copyrights.
(d) All the licensed version of the software, like CD, floppy, etc., with proper records and
storage. Proprietary rights and unless permitted by competent authorities in writing, no
copying of such licensed software must be done.
(e) The assets must be transported only through an authorised mode of transport.
Preparation
For ensuring full preparedness to carry out the critical activities and processes, the following
are necessary:
(i) Core and support teams consisting of skilled and trained personnel.
Human resources are the most valuable assets of the information systems. They are equally
the most vulnerable. Proper and adequate training for the field level functionaries in their
respective fields apart from general computing techniques will go a long way in avoiding
disaster situations and maintaining business continuity.
(ii) Alternate recovery sites known as 'disaster recovery sites' to take over in case of need
with proper outsourcing arrangements, if needed.
Financial service organisations like banks must strive for business continuity at all times.
Hence, they must have in place, requisite outsourcing arrangements, wherever, it is
applicable. The organisation, as a first line of defence, must be clear in its objectives and
enter service level agreements (SLAs) with its interests as the foremost in picture. In any such
contravening situations, the impacts and the responsibilities of the service providers must be
foreseen and SLAs must be arrived to ensure complete security to the organisation interests.
(iii) Back up of data on a daily basis.
(iv) Documentation for disaster recovery plan.
Testing
Different types of tests like mock testing (simulating a disaster condition), announced testing
to check the efficacy of the disaster recovery plan must be carried out on an on going basis
with suitable improvements thereon.
Recovery
Disaster or work disruption can happen due to the following factors and the recovery steps to
be taken are mentioned against each.
Arising out of external factors
1. a. Disaster due to breakdown or fire.
b. disaster due to floods/ tsunami.
c. disaster due to earthquake
2..Disaster due to power failure.
3. Disaster due to communication/ connectivity failure
The possible causes of fire in and around the location must location must be analysed
in detail and all preventive measures required, for the protection of assets from fire accidents
must be taken.
In a flood/tsunami prone area, adequate care has to be taken for location of the building and
for proper structural design to avoid damage due to flooding.
Earthquake can cause considerable damage to assets, resulting in the loss of data. Adequate
safety measures suggested by the ! local Government must be strictly adhered to.
Suitable alternate arrangements to overcome the disaster due to power failure are to be kept
ready.
Redundancy measures must be made available and periodically | checked to ensure that there
is no interruption in connectivity.
B. Arising out of data corruption/non-availability/unauthorised access of data
1. Disaster due to lack of data access control mechanism.
2. Disaster due to lack of data consistency
3. Failure of regular data backup and verification of verification of backed up data
periodically.
4. Use of unauthorized programmes to access data Proper logical access controls and user
level privileges must be established and documented with due control mechanism in place.
Direct modification / updating of data must be prevented. In case of exigency, such
modification / updating of data must be done with proper authorizations only and must be
documented. Logs must be made available.
Any disaster recovery plan can be effective only with a sound backup procedure adopted and
meticulously followed by the institution.
Authorised programmes only must be used by branches / offices and they must be suitably
protected from unauthorized access, alteration and misuse.
C. Arising out of failure of hardware and networking (LAN)
1. Disaster due to breakdown of file server and damage to nodes and other hardware
peripherals, connectivity, equipments, communication channels
2. Non-availability of hardware components
Compatible with the available systems due to obsolescence, mismatch of specifications, etc.
3. Loss of connectivity/ unauthorised connectivity in LAN environment
To obviate work disruption due to total damage to the file server, nodes and other
systems suitable backup measures are to be adopted.
Hardware requirements in the changing environment , at all levels, must be periodically
reassessed and the required upgrades/ add-on components must be taken up on need, taking
cost into consideration.
The LAN environment must be optimally utilised multi-LAN and inter-LAN environment
must be monitored properly with adequate security aspects.
D. Arising out of technology changes in software including operating system, application
software, executables and packages
1. Change in operating system, network operating system architecture due to up grade
/development
2. Lack of version control in
application packages/
programmes
3. Unsecured exposure of
software to external
environment
4. Lack of bacKup and library
of programmes/data
5. Non-availability/inadequate
documentation
6. Corruption/collision/conflict of executable programme files resulting in system hanging
denial of service Periodical upgrades/patches released by operating system/ network
operating system vendors must be procured and loaded into all the systems as a first-line
security measure and such actions must be properly documented.
Any change effected in the application package or programme must be with a proper
approval/ authorisation only and due documentation. End users must be made aware of
functional changes, if any.
All executable application programme files must be secured from exposure to external
environment. Use of external programmes to penetrate such executables must be totally
curtailed. User rights must be properly defined on such executable files with access
restrictions.
Proper backup and library of source codes and executables with compatible operating system
versions must be maintained and recorded.
Documentation for all application packages/programmes must be prepared with due
consideration for the end-user and their knowledge levels
Due care must be exercised when changing the programmes/over¬writing the executables. It
must be ensured that whenever new executables are loaded, they are compatible with the
earlier version and all the executables are compatible with a single version.
E. Arising out of human factors
1. Lack of knowledgeable and trained professional
2. Sabotage created out c. intentional or unintentional acts
Lack of knowledge must not be a reason for disaster. Adequate training has to be
given to all personnel involved, to have a 'First and Second line' and to ensure business
continuity and their knowledge must be refreshed periodically.
. Access to the computer room/site must be strictly controlled. Proper vigilance measures
must be in place to prevent network intrusions, hacking, etc.
351
Disaster due to virus attacks
. Instances relating to lack of physical access control, piggy backing, social engineering, etc.
Other risks such as burglary, fraud, etc. All computer systems in use must be loaded
with authorised 'Anti Virus' software and must be kept operational always.
Prudence in handling humanware must be undertaken and staff integrity must be encouraged.
All safety and security measures required to safeguard the assets against a burglary and
preventive measures to avoid commission of a fraud must be taken.
The aforesaid recovery measures come into action, after a disaster has occurred. During this
phase, activities such as damage assessment and salvaging take place. Depending upon the
impact of the disaster, critical activities are shifted to an alternate location or disaster
recovery site which is kept ready always for resuming business activities at short notice.
Thus, a well-documented disaster recovery plan as outlined above, can guide an organisation
to overcome any type of disaster with confidence.
33.8.6 System Development Process
Development of computer applications involves many procedures. Each application has a life
cycle and with the passage of time, a system may require a complete changeover. In order to
have a proper system embedded with a well-defined control mechanism, aimed at
safeguarding the banks' assets, a proper system development methodology has to be adopted
while developing any computerised system. Development of this system involves adherence
to certain well-defined standards. These standards pertain to project initiation, requirement
analysis, system design, programming, testing, implementation, evaluation and maintenance.
33.9 LEGAL FRAMEWORK FOR ELECTRONIC TRANSACTIONS
At present, many legal provisions recognise the paper-based records and documents that
should bear signatures. Since, electronic commerce eliminates the need for paper-based
transactions; therefore, to facilitate e-commerce, there was a need for legal changes. With the
increased use of electronic means, it is imperative that evidence of these activities should be
available to demonstrate the legal rights and obligations that flow from them. Taking
cognition of these, the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law
(UNCITRAL) adopted, in 1996, the 'Model Law on Electronic Commerce'. India is a
signatory to the Model Law. In its endeavour to give thrust to the Government's IT Policy, the
Indian Parliament enacted a comprehensive Information Technology Bill, which received the
President's assent on 9 June, 2000. This IT Act, 2000 provides legal recognition for
transactions carried out by means of electronic communication.
The act inter-alia deals with the following issues:
1. The Act provides a legal framework by validating and authorising the use of
'Electronic Data Interchange' (EDI), 'Electronic Records', and 'Electronic Signatures'. It,
further, provides that once a message leaves the information system of the originator of the
message, it is attributed to him. Thus, repudiation of a secured electronic message has been
checked.
2. The Act identifies a new set of information technology offences, which are delineated
in the Chapter XI of the Act. These offences have been listed as follows:
352
• Knowingly or intentionally concealing, tampering, destroying or altering or causing
another
to conceal, destroy or alter any computer source code used for a computer/network, when the
computer source code is required to be kept or maintained by law for the time being in force.
• Hacking, i.e. destroying, deleting or altering any information residing in a computer
resource
or diminishing its value or utility by any means, with the intent to cause wrongful loss or
damage to the public or any person.
• Obscenity, i.e. publishing or transmitting or causing to be published in electronic
form, any
material which is lascivious or if its effect is such, as to tend to deprave and corrupt persons
who are likely to read, see or hear the matter contained or embodied in it.
• The Government of India, by notification, can declare any computer system or
computer
network as a protected system. Only authorised persons can have access to the protected
system. Any access or attempt to secure access to a protected system in contravention to the
provision shall be construed as an offence.
• Any misrepresentation or suppression of facts for the purpose of obtaining any licence
or
digital signature certificate.
• Breach of confidentiality and privacy, i.e. disclosure of any electronic record, book,
register,
correspondence, information, document or other material accessed/obtained without the
consent of the person concerned.
• The Act describes special procedure for investigation and further proceedings, in
respect of
information technology offences and provides that a police officer not below the rank of
Deputy Superintendent of Police can investigate any offence under the Act.
3. Consequent upon the recognition given to the electronic records, electronic documents
and electronic signatures, incidental amendments have also been made in the following Acts:
(i) The Indian Penal Code, 1860 (ii) The Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (iii) The Banker's Books
Evidence Act, 1891 (iv) The Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934
• The Act purports to include the word 'electronic record' along with the word
'record'/'document' appearing generally in various sections of these acts. The amendments
also purport to include electronic records for the purpose of evidence and impart credence to
digital signatures and digital certificates.
• The amendment to Indian Penal Code, 1860, also states that for the purpose of the
Section 466 (dealing with forgery of records), a 'register' shall include any list, data or record
of any entries maintained in the electronic form as defined in the IT Act.
• Similarly, the Bankers Books Evidence Act, 1891, redefines banker's books as
ledgers, daybooks, cash books and account books, and all other books used in the ordinary
business of the bank, whether kept in written form or as printouts of data stored in a floppy,
disk, tape or in any other form of electromagnetic data- storage device.
• The RBI Act, 1934 has been amended by the IT Act, 2000, empowering the central
board to make regulations for fund transfers through electronic means between the banks or
between the banks and other financial institutions.
It will be seen that this enactment of Information Technology Act, 2000 shall usher in a new
era for e-governance and e-commerce as it provides rules for validation and recognition of
contracts formed through electronic means and also supports the admissibility of computer
evidence in the courts of law. The act will also facilitate electronic filing of documents with
the government agencies.
353
33.10 LET US SUM UP
Computer installations in banks represent assets valuable to the banking operations. Data,
hardware, software and manpower are the vital components. The technological breakthroughs
and their application to banking operations have greatly affected the security considerations,
to counter the threats to these assets, computer security and control procedures must,
therefore, form an integral part of the system of internal controls within a bank.
Most of the physical, operational and internal controls are designed to prevent events that
may threaten banking operations. Due to complex nature of the banking operations, even
properly designed security and control systems can fail and leave a bank exposed to losses, if
the laid down procedures are not followed in practice. Therefore, containment controls are
designed to detect and limit the effect on the business and contingency plans are provided to
minimise the losses in case the preventive controls fail in preventing the threats.
However, a regular programme of audits can help in identification of lapses, before the
banking operations are seriously put to risk. It requires a proper audit strategy by the banks.
33.11 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS
1. A typical computerised environment constitutes three interdependent but separate
components,
(a) Software, hardware and data (b) Hardware, software and UPS
(c) Software, modem and networking(d) Software, people ware and data
(e) None of these
2. The risks broadly lead to:
(a) Incorrect decision making leading to setback to business
(b) Interruption in activities due to loss of data, hardware, software, people ware
(c) Violation of privacy
(d) Direct financial loss due to computer frauds
(e) All of these
3. The phases of disaster recovery planning are:
(a) Awareness (b) Preparation
(c) Testing (d) Recovery
(e) All of these
4. The consequences of errors in computerised systems are more serious than in manual
systems
because:
(a) Computer systems process more data
(b) Errors in computer systems are generated at high speed, and the cost to correct may be
high
(c) Users of computer systems perceive the computer outputs to be always correct
(d) All of above
(e) (a) and (c)
5. Compared to a manual system, in a computer system:
(a) The methodologies for implementing controls change
(b) Basic controls objectives change
(c) Control objectives are more difficult to achieve
(d) All of above
(e) (a) and (b)
354
6. IS audit for the software used is carried out by CAATT. This type is known as:
(a) The audit around the computer (b) The audit through the computer
(c) The audit with the computer (d) All of above
(e) None of these
7. Risk prone component(s) in computerised systems are:
(a) Errors and omissions in data and software
(b) Unauthorised disclosure of confidential information
(c) Computer abuse and mis-utilisation of banks assets
(d) Frauds
(e) All of above
8. Effective control mechanism(s) in computerised environment are:
(a) Preventive (b) Detective
(c) Corrective - (d) All of above
(e) (a)and(c)
Integrity All of above
(b) (d)
9. Objective of IS security is to ensure; (a) Confidentiality (c) Availability (e) None of these
10. Audit trail is:
(a) A chronological record of all events occurring in a system is:
(b) Report submitted by auditors
(c) A collection of record generated by database administrator
(d) All of above
(e) None of these
33.12 ANSWERS TO CHECK YOUR PROGRESS'
33.13 KEYWORDS
Data, Access Control Systems, Algorithm, Online, Password, Real time, Disaster.
MODULE -D
SUPPORT SERVICES - MARKETING OF BANKING SERVICES/PRODUCTS
Unit 34. Marketing - An Introduction
Unit 35. Consumer Behaviour and Product
Unit 36. Pricing
Unit 37. Distribution
Unit 38. Channel Management
Unit 39. Promotion
Unit 40. Role of Direct Selling Agent/Direct Marketing Agent in a Bank
Unit 41. Marketing Information Systems - A Longitudinal Analysis
MARKETING
An Introduction
STRUCTURE
34.0 Objectives
34.1 Introduction
34.2 Marketing Concept
34.2.1 Market
34.2.2 Types of Market
34.2.3 Marketing
34.2.4 Evolution of Modern Marketing
34.2.5 Marketing - A Management Function
34.2.6 Marketing - A Business Philosophy
34.2.7 Selling vs. Marketing
34.3 Marketing Management
34.3.1 Definition
34.3.2 Functions of Marketing Management
34.3.3 Importance of Marketing for Indian Banks
34.4 Products and Services
34.4.1 What is a product?
34.4.2 Characteristics of Physical Products
34.4.3 Characteristics of Service Products
34.4.4 The Servuction Process
34.4.5 Marketing of Financial Services
34.4.6 Types of Financial Markets in India
34.4.7 Marketing of Banking Services
34.4.8 Implications of Service Characteristics for Marketing
34.5 Marketing Mix
34.5.1 Tools of Marketing Mix
34.5.2 The Services Marketing Mix
34.6 Let Us Sum Up
34.7 Check Your Progress
34.8 Answers to 'Check Your Progress'
34.9 Keywords
358
34.0 OBJECTIVES
In this unit, we seek to know and understand the:
• Concept of marketing
• Significance of marketing in general and as applicable to Indian banks
• Difference between services and physical goods
• Importance of 4Ps in deciding the marketing mix
34.1 INTRODUCTION
Generally, marketing is understood as selling of products or services. Some consider
advertising or promoting a product as marketing. The idea of marketing is much broader. It
essentially is related to customer. The earliest attempts at marketing can be traced to the
barter system.
The barter system can be looked upon as a reflection of the realisation that exchange adds
value to both the parties to the transaction. This indeed marked the dawn of marketing. Since
then, the evolution of commerce through various stages has led to the development of
marketing into a philosophy of business.
Marketing is both a concept and a practice. The understanding of marketing is in its entirety a
decision on appropriate marketing mix and strategies, has to be looked upon from the
customer's angle to make a product successful in the market.
34.2 MARKETING CONCEPT
34.2.1 Market
The word "market" in common parlance refers to the place where goods can be bought or
sold.
A market consists of all the potential customers sharing a particular need or want who might
be able to engage in an exchange to satisfy that need or want.
Market implies:
• A situation where buyers and sellers of a commodity interact
• Coming together of buyers and sellers of the same or similar commodities
It is possible for sellers to be dealing in one variety of soap and the buyers being interested in
another variety, which can be substituted by the one available with the sellers.
Market is not necessarily a geographical area. Groups of buyers and sellers can be located
widely apart from each other. With the advancement in communication and transport
facilities, the buyers and sellers can easily contact each other even if they are physically at
long distances. A market may comprise any of the following situations like one/many seller(s)
and buyer(s) that might give rise to different market types, marketing and strategies.
34.2.2 Types of Market:
Markets, can be grouped into different types as indicated below.
Basis of Classification
Types of Market
Geographical Area
Product
Nature of Transaction
Volume of Transaction
(a) Local Market; (b) Regional Market; (c) National Market; (d) World/Global
Market.
a) CottonlTeaA/egetable Market; (b) Share Market; (c) Bullion Market; (d) Capital Market;
(e) Real Estate Market; (f) Retail Loan Market.
(a) Cash/Spot Market; (b) Futures Market; (c) Commodity Market.
(a) Retail Market; (b) Wholesale Market.
359
In the case of banks and financial institutions, market may be local and/or global, wholesale
or retail, primary or secondary, etc.
34.2.3 Marketing
Marketing is a concept, which has developed over a period of several centuries. As far back
as in 1776, in his famous work "The Wealth of Nations", Adam Smith wrote: Consumption is
the sole end and purpose of all production and the interests of the producer ought to be
attended to, only so far as it may he necessary for promoting that of the consumer. This
statement contains the essence of marketing concept. The operating word is consumer. The
identification and satisfaction ofa consumer's requirements form the basis of marketing.
Marketing, has also been defined, as "meeting needs profitably". Various scholars have
further described marketing in different ways:
• Marketing is the process of determining consumer demand for a product or service,
motivating its sale and distributing it into ultimate consumption at a profit. (Brech)
• Marketing is concerned with the creation and maintenance of mutually satisfying
exchange relationships. (Baker)
• Marketing is the business function that identifies the current unfulfilled needs and
wants, defines and measures their magnitude, determines which target markets the
organisation can best serve, and decides on appropriate products, services, and programmes
to serve these markets.
Thus, marketing serves as a link between a society's needs and its pattern of industrial
response. (Kotler)
A reflection on the foregoing definitions reveals:
• Focus of marketing is on the consumer.
• A human need is a state of deprivation of some basic satisfaction, which results in
desire for specific satisfiers of these needs, namely wants. Wants for specific products,
backed by an ability and willingness to buy them, results in a demand.
• Gradually, marketing concept has become more comprehensive - moving from
assessing and fulfilling consumer demand to identifying needs and wants and determining
products and services. Indeed, in the present age, marketing includes not only anticipating the
consumer needs but kindling needs and providing new products and services to fulfil them.
34.2.4 Evolution of Modern Marketing
Over the centuries, the world economies have changed radically; beginning from the hunting
stage, commerce has passed through the stages of barter exchange, village economy, town
economy, national economy and has reached globalisation. The world has also witnessed two
major technological revolutions, namely, industrial revolution and digital revolution. Market
place has witnessed Darwinian situation of survival of the fittest.
In the early stages, the human beings procured the goods they needed themselves by hunting
or exploring them in nature. Then somewhere took place the first transaction of exchange of
goods, maybe a goat or a sheep with a cow or some grains and the barter system came into
existence. With the monetisation of economy, trade and commerce flourished. However, in
the early stages of development of commerce, the businesses believed that the consumers
would buy what was available and that the producers knew best what the consumers needed.
Ford, the largest automobile manufacturer of USA, proclaimed: 'The customer could have a
car of any colour, as long as it was black!' The focus in the initial stages was on the demand
for products. As the development progressed at a faster pace and the competition increased
among the businesses, the firms adopted the concept, that the companies need to be customer-
arid*
360
market driven, which was the beginning of the modern marketing phenomenon. The
businesses started looking at the situation from the customer's perspective. The firms sought
to know the customer's requirements and direct their efforts to provide them goods or
services, suitable to fulfil these requirements. The focus shifted to the wants of customers.
Marketing, therefore, is not an activity confined to either sales or promotion of the goods and
services of the businesses.
The changes ever since have brought about radical developments in the field of marketing.
The focus today is on Customer Relationship Management. Marketing is an organisation
wide undertaking, driving the vision, mission and strategic planning of the firms. The
objective of maximising the firm's profit is subordinate to the objective of maximising
customer satisfaction. The crucial need to retain customers and simultaneously to acquire new
customers amid intense competition and vanishing product differences have driven the firms
to be aggressively market driven. The firms now take a holistic view of the customer; try to
anticipate his/her needs even before the customer feels the same and proactively offer
solutions to meet the same. The approach is to develop and nurture a mutually fruitful bond
between the firm and the customer.
The present-day environment is characterised by globalised economy, fast pace, rapidly
changing technologies, and an empowered consumer. The consumers are experiencing a
wider choice of goods and services, increased purchasing power, availability of information
on anything and everything, convenience of transacting purchases anytime anywhere.
Companies are also better positioned with new information and delivery channels,
comprehensive market and customer information, faster communication - both internal and
external, customised and target communications and offerings to individual customers,
improved business processes of purchases, recruitment, logistics, and operations with cost
savings, better accuracy and service quality. All this certainly has a profound impact on
modern day marketing.
Modern business enterprises recognise very well the importance of customer satisfaction. In
the words of Edgar Woolard, CEO, DuPont - 'Nothing is worthwhile unless it touches the
customer'. If their customers are not satisfied, firms run the risk of losing them to
competition. It is also difficult to attract new customers without the ability to satisfy
customers. These are the only two sources of revenue and hence, it is necessary to attract new
customers and retain them. This underlines the importance of marketing, which now even
touches upon functions like the production line, which can affect customer satisfaction apart
from the traditional marketing functions like branding.
Certain studies in the United States have revealed that the level of customer satisfaction
generally increased during 1980s and early 1990s, as it was the urgent goal of most
businesses. However, during the mid-nineties, several studies revealed a declining trend of
customer satisfaction. This was thought to be the result of a shift in the focus of the
management to change management, downsizing, mergers and acquisitions. This has helped
in cost-cutting and higher corporate earnings and in satisfying the stockholders in the short
term. But, with the growing customer dis-satisfaction, this approach endangers the long-term
prosperity of businesses. It is important for businesses to adopt customer-oriented
management.
The scope of marketing in modern days covers, besides goods and services, other entities like
experiences, events, persons, places, properties, organisations, information and ideas.
Marketing is a combination of business management and the philosophy^of business.
Marketing has seen great changes in its journey to today's times. From the barter system to
the system of plastic money, from localised markets to globalised markets, from inventory-
based marketing to future markets, from marketing through technology-to-technology created
markets. In the modern marketing, firms cannot afford to lose the customer. So, an attempt is
made to win over the customer, creating an intoxication effect for the service or the product
the firm offers. The Customer Relationship
361
Management has become the "Hub" of all activities of the firms. In modern marketing, the
focus has shifted from existing products to products the customer may expect from the firm.
This led to customer oriented mergers and acquisitions, corporate agencies, strategic
alliances, business partnerships, etc. It has also redefined the corporate goals, mission and
vision and the total attitude of the firms. The firms are now attempting to cross-sell the
products to fulfil the customer needs and create a win-win situation. Thus, in modern times
the marketing concepts have undergone great change and become more complex.
34.2.5 Marketing - A Management Function
From one perspective, it is & functional area of management and is within the firm using
various developed techniques for achieving specific objectives. Its major role is to identify
the current and future needs and wants of specifically defined target markets. The
organisation acts upon this information to produce goods and services to satisfy customer
requirements. Marketing provides entrepreneurship by identifying opportunities in customer
requirements and driving mobilisation of resources to capitalise on them. Marketing forms an
interface with the existing and potential customers. It passes through the management
functions of analysing, planning, implementing and controlling.
34.2.6 Marketing - A Business Philosophy
From another perspective, marketing is much more than a management function. It is a way
of thinking about business and a way of working, running through every aspect of the firm's
activities. It is a customer and profit-oriented approach permeating the entire business. It is,
therefore, an attitude of mind and hence an overall business philosophy.
34.2.7 Selling vs. Marketing
There is a conceptual difference between selling and marketing. Firms sell their goods or
services to customers who buy them and attempt to induce them in buying through
advertisements and promotions. Marketing relates to producing or creating goods or services
needed by the customers. In the former case, the objective is to sell whatever is available with
the firms. While in case of marketing, the objec¬tive is to meet the customer's need.
Marketing function starts much before actual selling of the product.
TABLE: 34.1 Comparison between Selling and Marketing
Selling Marketing
Selling is an operational activity
Selling is product focused
Selling is oriented to the needs of the seller (the firms)
Selling encashes profitable opportunity
Selling aims at earning profits by maximising sales volume
Marketing is a total management concept comprising identification of customer
needs, developing suitable products to meet those needs, delivering (selling) the products to
the customers and facilitating the consumption for ultimate satisfaction of those needs. Thus,
selling is a part of marketing.
Marketing is customer focused
Marketing is oriented to the needs of the buyer (the customers).
Marketing converts customer needs into such opportunities
Marketing aims at earning profits by maximising customer satisfaction.
It is shown in Figures 34.1 and 34.2.
Selling = Factory —> Products -> Selling and promotion —» Profits
FIGURE:34.1
362
Marketing = Target market -> Needs —»Integrated marketing -» Profit by customer
satisfaction
FIGURE 34.2
34.3 MARKETING MANAGEMENT
A study of the evolution of marketing brings forth its development into a management
function using various advanced techniques for achieving specific objectives. Marketing
management encompasses the entire range of activities, from the identification of business
opportunities in the customer needs to the customer satisfaction through consumption of
goods or services, leading to fulfilment of the need.
34.3.1 Definition
"American Management Association" has adopted the following definition of marketing
management:
"Marketing (management) is the process of planning and executing the conception, pricing,
promotion and distribution of goods, service, and ideas to create exchanges with target
groups that satisfy customer and organisational objectives."
34.3.2 Functions of Marketing Management
Marketing management comprises four key functional aspects, viz., Analysis, Planning,
Implementation and Control.
(a) Analysis: There is a need to understand customers, competitors, trends and changes in
the environment and internal strengths and weaknesses for drawing out effective marketing
plans. This requires collection of information related to these areas using systematic
marketing research and marketing information systems, and scientific analysis of the data.
(b) Planning: It covers both strategic planning for the long-term marketing direction of
the firm (for example, selection of target markets), and marketing programmes and tactics to
be used to support the strategic plans. The plans should include the goals and targets in
measurable terms, and also the estimates of resources, and the actions required for their
implementation.
(c) Implementation: The implementation of strategic and tactical plans requires staffing,
allocation of tasks and responsibilities, budgeting, and securing financial and other resources
needed.
(d) Control: Measurement and evaluation of progress against the goals and targets spelt
out in the plans is an important function for determining the future course of action. This may
prove to be problematic due to difficulties in measuring the performance criteria and
ascertaining the cause and effect. It is a complex function requiring use of both qualitative
and quantitative techniques
including budgetary control, control of marketing mix, and even marketing audit.
34.3.3 Importance of Marketing for Indian Banks
Banking organisations are newcomers to marketing. It was the banks in the UK and US,
which were the first to begin applying the marketing concepts during the 1960s.
!n India, the banking industry has passed through major transformations during the twentieth
century. At the time of independence, India had 558 commercial banks, of which 459 were
non-scheduled banks. The Imperial Bank of India was converted into State Bank of India in
1955 and was given the mandate to cover the rural areas, cater to the needs of agriculture and
small-scale industries, besides serving as agent of Reserve Bank of India in places, where it
did not have offices. In 1967, the number of banks was reduced to ninety-one, due to several
liquidations and amalgamations followed by nationalisation of fourteen major banks of the
country in 1969. Indian banking system transformed itself from class banking to mass
banking. The banks promoted the banking services to inculcate the banking habits among the
public. It indeed was a situation, which illustrated the relevance of marketing in a
monopolistic situation. During the 1970s, the number of bank branches of public sector banks
363
increased at a very rapid pace. As a result, the banks started feeling the competitive forces,
especially in the urban areas. Besides, in the 1980s, there were other changes like
development of small savings instruments, corporate sector tapping the primary market
through public deposits, equity shares, and debentures. The banks thus faced competition
both on the assets and liabilities fronts. At that point, the need for marketing was realised not
only by the individual banks but at the banking industry level. In his statement at the AGM,
in April, 1987, the then chairman of the Indian Banks' Association, Mr. M.N. Goiporia said,
"The relevance of aggressive marketing in banks has come to the fore as never before... The
banking system in the country has built-up a vast infrastructure, at a substantial cost and
unless aggressive efforts are made to market their deposit and credit schemes, as well as the
wide range of facilities and services offered, there could be under-utilisation of the banking
infrastructure."
The following decade saw the Indian banking witness another major transformation - the
emergence of liberalisation process that brought about two most eventful changes. One, the
regulatory framework for banks, which was highly restrictive, was changed into a rigorous
but broader control system. Two, the banking sector reopened to the private sector. Hence,
while the banks got more freedom, they also had newer forces to reckon with.
In retrospect, it is seen that the banks, after nationalisation, had the necessity of catering to a
wide spectrum of customers, with different needs. They responded by developing a new
range of services. Although the customer orientation as a marketing concept was talked about
at a much later stage, the bank management displayed marketing acumen in their practices.
The largest bank of the country, State Bank of India, reorganised itself in 1970s, on the lines
of market segments, viz., commercial and institutional, small industries and small business,
agriculture and personal; and having a distinct development wing which had the primary
function of marketing. As the economy developed and the customers were exposed to the
sophisticated products offered by the banks abroad, the banks in India were faced with the
demand for similar products. The banks have, therefore, to be continuously acquiring the
capabilities for and have to be innovative in offering new varied services.
One major cause for concern for the banks has been their profitability. The social
responsibilities thrust upon them, which also required them to extend their network in remote
rural areas rendering such branches non-viable, affected their bottom lines adversely.
Evolving suitable strategies for improving the profitability, particularly in the deregulated and
liberalised environment is one major challenge, and it underscores the need for marketing for
banking organisations.
The new generation private sector banks started with technologically superior systems and
took to aggressive marketing of their products. They started segmenting the customer base
and offered products suitable to each segment.
The entry of new generation private sector banks in India has inter-alia brought to the fore
two major aspects. One, the use of information technology for delivery of banking services,
which has not only affected the banking products but also facilitated new outlets, for
example, ATMs, Internet, etc. Two, it renewed focus on the high net worth customer, which
has created a different type of private banking in the Indian banks. This proved to be a
catalyst, which brought into play a rapid reaction across the entire banking sector. The
computerisation of bank branches took place at fast pace thereafter not only among the public
sector banks, but even among the old private sector banks and cooperative banks. These
developments have underlined the marketing orientation of banks. The banks are now not
only conscious of the customer needs but are focused on customer relations management.
34.4 PRODUCTS AND SERVICES 34.4.1 Whafis a Product?
Philip Kotler defined a product as "anything that can be offered to a market for attention,
acquisition.
364
use or consumption. It includes physical objects, services, personalities, places, organisations
and ideas." So, the product can be a physical goods or a service product.
34.4.2 Characteristics of Physical Products
• Tangible
• Homogeneous
• Production and distribution separated from consumption
• Core value produced in factory
• Customers do not participate in the production process
• Can be stored
• Transfer of ownership possible.
What is a Service?
Kotler and Bloom defined service as "A service is any act or performance that one party can
offer to another that is essentially intangible and does not result in the ownership of anything.
Its production mayor may not be tied to a physical product."
34.4.3 Characteristics of Service Products
• Intangibility: Refers to the aspects not associated with any physical form or
characteristics. It is very much, pronounced in the pure service element like the lecture given
by a professor.
• Inseparability: It means that the production and consumption of the service are
inextricably intertwined. Hence, the consumer's presence is in most cases necessary at the
time of production.
Goods are usually purchased, sold and consumed; whereas, services are usually sold and then
produced and consumed.
• Heterogeneity: The services offered are not similar all the times to all the customers.
This feature of service is called "Heterogeneity". The quality of a service depends on the
person, who provides the service, or the time, when provided. Even though standard systems
may be used to handle a flight reservation, book a car for service, each "unit" of service
differs from other "units".
• Perishability: This means that the service "units" cannot be stocked. If a seat is
unfilled when the plane leaves or the play starts, it cannot be stored and sold next day or next
week; that revenue is lost forever.
The above mentioned characteristics do not apply in equal measure to all services. Some
services are highly intangible (e.g. education); others are highly tangible (e.g. fast food
restaurant); some may be highly variable (e.g. dental treatment); some highly standardised
(e.g. automatic car wash). The notion
TABLE 34.2 Difference between Physical Goods and Services
Physical Goods Services
1. Tangible
2. Homogeneous
3. Production and distribution separated from
consumption
4. A thing
5. Core value produced in factory
6. Customers do not participate in the production process
7. Can be kept in stock
8. Transfer of ownership Intangible
Heterogeneous
Production, distribution and consumption are simul¬taneous processes
An activity or process
Core value produced in buyer-seller interactions
Customers participate in the production
Cannot be kept in stock
No transfer of ownership
365
of a continuum of tangibility, inseparability, heterogeneity and perishability is helpful in
understanding the effects of these characteristics on the marketing strategies.
Christian Gronroos (1990) presents the differences between physical goods and services as in
Table 34.2.
Services now account for more than seventy per cent of employment and GNP of most
industrialised countries. Many industrial corporations also owe their revenue and profitability
to the peripheral services they add on to their products. However, the marketing literature is
concentrated mostly on physical products, because it was applied first and most intensively to
these. Services markets are now attracting greater attention.
How Different Actually are Services?
There is no clear-cut line between services and physical goods. Many products, which are
primarily physical goods, include large elements of service in their delivery. Services may
form a vital part of the total bundle of benefits which is sought, particularly in industrial
markets.
Many services, on the other hand include a large contribution from hardware: hotels, airlines,
fast food outlets are all classed as services, but the physical elements in the offering are a
large part of what customers buy. The difference is that as a buyer we do not receive the
ownership of the physical elements of a service, but only rent them for a period.
Levitt has suggested: . . . "there are no such things as service industries. There are only
industries, whose service components are greater or less than those of the other industries.
Everybody is in service."
If the absolute tangible and intangible elements are taken as two ends of a continuum, it will
be observed that all goods and services occupy different positions in the continuum as shown
in Figure 34.3.
Advertising Agencies
Salt
Detergents
Soft Drink
Automobiles
Automobiles
Fast Food Outlets
Airlines Consultancy Teaching
TANGIBLE DOMINANCE
INTANGIBLE DOMINANCE
FIGURE 34.3 A Goods Service Continuum: G. Lynn Shostack
Search (or tangible) goods are generally those which are packaged, and can be seen,
evaluated and tried by the buyers before the purchase. Experienced (or intangible) goods are
those which can be seen or evaluated only after the purchase. There could be product, which
fall between these two extremes (Figure 34.4).
According to an improved classification of Philip Kotler, the offerings to the marketplace
may be:
• Pure tangible goods: Primarily a tangible good and no service accompanying it.
• Tangible goods with accompanying services: Tangible goods + one or more services.
• Hybrid: Equal parts of goods and services.
• Major service with accompanying minor tangible goods.
• Pure service: Primarily of a service nature.
The original idea of a single continuum of tangibility for understanding the differences
between goods and services has been extended recently to suggest that all four characteristics
of services (Figure 34.5) can be described and related in this way. (Payne)
366
GOODS
Search goods Experienced goods
Prior to Purchase/ use Buying consumption
Tangible Intangible
Salt Soft Drink Refrigerator Airlines Meditations
FIGURE 34.5 Continuum of the Characteristics of Services
Intangibility
Inseparability The Service Hetrogenity
Perishability
Thus, while legal service is less tangible, varied and can be performed away from the
customer, a fast food service is highly tangible, generally standardised and usually performed
near the customer.
34.4.4 The Servuction Process
In many cases, the production and consumption of services take place at the same moment.
Production and consumption occur simultaneously; they cannot be separated. So, the
consumer and service provider interact during the service experience.
Eiglier and Langeard developed the concept of the "servuction process". This word is a
combination of services and production, indicating the simultaneous production and
consumption of services.
In general, the servuction process differs from a production process of a tangible good, in the
following respects:
• Interaction between the front office personnel and the client. The direct contact between
service provider and customer is essential. During these events, the actual service delivery
takes place. These are the decisive moments - moments of truth, where the organisation
actually shows what they can do and how they meet expectations set.
367
• Certain degree of relevancy of the physical surrounding to the customer.
• Mutual interaction between customers, during the production process. Customer A
will be affected by the presence of customers B and C.
The borderline between front office and back office is not fixed forever within a particular
service organisation. It may change overtime. It may be subject to the marketing policy of a
service provider.
The servuction process refers to human encounters to both a profit and a non-profit setting.
People interact with one another, unless machines (like the automated teller machines in
banks) substitute a (large) part of the service encounter. This offers the opportunity for people
to start building some kinds of relationships with one another in these service encounters.
Building these relationships is important for several reasons:
• First, it offers the opportunity to learn about each other's wishes, whims, preferences,
capabilities, opportunities, etc. This may sharpen the knowledge of the expectations about the
other "party involved in the transaction".
• Second, existing relationships may function as a means to keep customers.
34.4.5 Marketing of Financial Services
The characteristics of services, viz., intangibility, inseparability, heterogeneity and
perishability are all present in financial services, too. Some assume special meaning in the
context of financial services. Intangibility has two aspects:
(i) At one level, it is concerned with the fact that services are impalpable in the sense that
they have no physical form.
(ii) Many services are intangible from a conceptual point of view, in that they are not easily
defined and may be difficult to understand. (Bateson)
The presence of inseparability tends to imply that consumers themselves play a significant
role in the production of services. For a service to be provided, the physical presence of the
consumer or some contact with the consumer is required to obtain the information necessary
for rendering the service to be performed. The consumer making a loan application need not
be in the physical presence of a loan assessor, but must supply the assessor with the
information required to evaluate the application.
Financial services display an additional feature, which affects the marketing process namely,
the fiduciary responsibility. It refers to the implicit responsibility which financial services
organisations have in relation to the management of funds, and the financial advice they
render to their customers. Marsh establishes that although any business has a responsibility to
its customers in terms of quality, reliability and safety of the products it supplies, this
responsibility is perhaps much greater in the case of a financial services organisation. This is
partly because consumers of such services often find the precise details of the services
difficult to comprehend and are, therefore, place their trust in the organisation they deal with.
Equally important is the fact that the "raw materials" used to produce many financial products
are consumers' deposits; thus, in producing and selling a loan product, the bank has a
responsibility not only to the person taking the loan but at the same time, it also has a
responsibility to the individuals whose deposits have made that loan possible.
The implications of intangibility, inseparability and heterogeneity manifest themselves at
both strategic and tactical levels in services marketing. Thomas Stresses the importance of a
clear understanding of the nature of the business and the establishment in order to formulate a
distinctive basis on which to compete. It is important to formulate the basis on which to
compete, given the difficulties of competing-based on offering a service with distinctive
attributes or features.
The need for marketing of financial services has arisen due to various external factors like
"Deregulation" that has removed the traditional restrictions on the types of product which a
particular institution could
368
supply, and has created the opportunity for expansion into new markets. Globalisation of
financial markets and now the capital account convertibility will bring more complications to
the marketing of financial services in India. Intensive use of IT, growth of products and
technology enabled transactions have drastically reduced the cash transactions, thus volumes
in financial markets have increased. Volatility and risk perception in financial products have
further added to the complexity of the market. These present the financial services sector with
a number of new opportunities and threats. As the environment facing suppliers of financial
services has become increasingly competitive and uncertain, the importance of marketing in
guiding the business development has increased.
34.4.6 Types of Financial Markets in India
The following are the types of financial markets in India. Today the banks are involved in
most of the listed activities of these markets, as a customer expects all financial services to be
offered to them under one roof:
The credit market The money market
Equity and term lending market Debt market
Gilt-edged securities market Leasing and hire purchase
Insurance market foreign Exchange market
Mutual funds Stock markets
Consumer finance market
34.4.7 Marketing of Banking Services
One definition of bank marketing, as referred to by the NIBM, Pune, is as follows:
Bank marketing is the aggregate of functions, directed at providing services to satisfy
customers' financial (and other related) needs and wants, more effectively and efficiently than
the competitors keeping in view the organisational objectives of the bank.
This definition highlights the following points:
(i) Banks provide services
(ii) Aim is to satisfy customers' needs and wants of specific nature (iii) The nature of needs
and wants of the customer is primarily financial, while some may be incidental
to or related to these
(iv) The competitive element, efficiency and effectiveness are major factors in the process (v)
Organisational objectives are still the driving force.
The aggregate of functions mentioned in the definition is the sum total of an integrated effort
to discover, create, arouse and satisfy customer needs. Each individual working in the bank is
a marketing person who contributes to the total satisfaction of customers.
Bank marketing deals with providing of services to satisfy customers 'financial needs and
wants. Banks have to discover/ascertain/anticipate the financial needs of the customers and
offer the services, which can satisfy those needs. Banks may be required to satisfy the
customers' other related needs and wants. The individuals and corporate bodies have certain
financial needs in relation to money commodity. To satisfy these financial needs customers
want specific services. Different banks offer different benefits by offering various schemes,
which can take care of the wants of the customers.
Marketing helps in achieving the organisational objectives of the bank. This means that
marketing is equally applicable to achieve commercial and social objectives of the banks.
Indian banks have dual organisational objectives:
(i) Commercial objective to make profit
369
(ii) Social objective, which is a developmental role particularly in the rural areas. The
marketing concept points to the following essentials, which contribute towards a bank's
success:
(i) The bank cannot exist without the customers, (ii) The purpose of the bank is to create, win
and keep a customer. The customer is and should be the
central focus of everything the bank does.
(iii) It is also a way of organising the bank. The starting point for organisational design
should be the customer The bank should ensure that the performance and delivery of the
services are done in the most effective way. Service facilities also need to be designed for
customers' convenience. (iv) The ultimate aim of a bank is to deliver total satisfaction to the
customer. (v) Customer satisfaction is affected by the performance of all the personnel of the
bank.
34.4.8 Implications of Service Characteristics for Marketing
Table 34.3 depicts the major implications of the characteristics of services for marketing
activities.
TABLE 34.3 Characteristics of Services - their Implications for Marketing Activities
Service Some Marketing Some Remedial Approaches
Characteristics Implications
Intangibility (a) Consumers may have difficulty inMake the offerings more tangible, e.g.
use clues
evaluating like uniforms, use of image, brand names focus on
benefits of service.
(b) Sampling a service - Difficult Need to manage effectively the organisation-
due to intangibility the relation- consumer relationship, to lessen the effect
ship could suffer intangibility.
(c) Difficult to judge price/value Develop a price "reputation", reinforce value
during and after service, "explain" price.
(d) Places strain on promotional Increase tangibility of service through:
element of marketing mix Visualisation - Utilise experience in advertising.
Association - Connect service with a tangible
good, object or place.
Physical Representation - Use items to represent
the services (e.g. dress standards, documents).
(e) Development of new service Devise means for conceptual testing prepare
becomes difficult detailed service specifications/processes.
Inseparability (a) Requires presence of the ■ Customer contact personnel key and require
producer of service careful selection, training support for service -
"encounters".
(b) May require presence of the Integrate consumer's presence into the delivery
consumer process.
(c) Opportunities for continuous Exploit presence of consumer to monitor service
and quick feedback of consumers process and quality.
(d) Where personal service Seek solutions, which simplify limits scale of
operation, process, regulate supply demand,
schedule transactions, subcontract work, use
technology, use consumer as a "producer" in
process (e.g. self-service).
{Contd
370
(Table 34.3 contd. . . .)
Service Characteristics Some Marketing Implications Some Remedial
Approaches
Heterogeneity
Perishability Services difficult to standardise and harder to control design, production
Services cannot be stored Develop performance standards, performance indicators, and
reduce perceived risk of purchase and use and delivery through control of service encounter
(e.g. use of standard procedures and technology).
Specify service quality: remind customer of the service quality delivered, use internal
marketing to reinforce standards, emphasise bespokeness where uniformity not sought, "pre-
package" the service.
"Manage" supply and demand through peak/off-peak pricing, reservation systems. Create
flexible excess capacity (e.g. part-time employees). Offer alternative uses of unused facilities.
Promote off-peak use.
34.5 MARKETING MIX
Brodens concept of marketing mix: Marketing mix is one of the key concepts in the modern
marketing theory. In practice, the marketing mix is considered to be the core of marketing.
Marketing mix is the set of marketing tools that a firm uses to pursue its marketing objectives
in the target market.
34.5.1 Tools of Marketing Mix
There are several marketing-mix tools. McCarthy popularised a four-factor classification of
these tools called the four Ps: product, price, place (i.e. distribution), and promotion.
The particular marketing variables under each P are shown in Figure 34.6.
A marketing mix is selected from numerous possibilities. Marketing-mix decisions must be
made for both the distribution channels and the final consumers. Figure 34.7 given by Kotler
is a representation of a company's marketing-mix strategy. It points to the interplay of various
factors and players in the market, which can affect the results of the marketing efforts.
A company may not be able to adjust all the marketing-mix variables in the short run.
Normally, the firm can change its price, sales force, size and advertising expenditures in the
short run. Development of new products and modifications in its distribution channels, are
more feasible in the end. Thus, the firm typically makes fewer period-to-period marketing-
mix changes in the short run than the number of marketing-mix variables suggest.
The most basic marketing-mix tool is the product, which stands as the firm's tangible offer to
the market, including the product quality, design, features, branding and packaging. The
company could also provide various services, such as delivery, repair, and training, as well as
running an equipment-leasing business.
Price is a critical marketing-mix tool. The company has to decide on wholesale and retail
prices, discounts, allowances and credit terms. Its price has got to be commensurate with the
customers' perceived value of the offer or else, they will turn to competitors for choosing
their products.
Place is another key marketing-mix tool. It facilitates the various activities the company
undertakes to
371
MARKETING MIX
PRODUCT PLACE
variety
channels
quality
coverage
design
Assortments
Features
Locations
Brand Name TARGET MARKET
Inventory
Packaging
Transport
sizes
Services
Warranties
Returns
PRICE PROMOTION
List Price Sales Promotion
Discounts Advertising
Allowances Sales Force
Payment Period Public Relations
Credit Terms Direct Marketing
FIGURE 34.6 Marketing Mix Variables
Promotion Mix
Sales
Other Mix Promotion
► Advertising r
Products
—> Distribution P, Target
COMPANY ■Services j ► Sales Force Channels
Customers
1
Public
Prices Relations
Direct Mail/
Telemarketing
FIGURE 34.7 Interplay of Factors on Marketing
make the product accessible and available to target customers. The company must identify,
recruit and link various intermediaries and marketing facilitators so that its products and
services are efficiently supplied to the target market. It must understand the various types of
retailers, wholesalers, and physical-distribution firms and how they make their decisions.
Promotion as a marketing-mix tool stands for the various activities the company undertakes
to communicate and promote its products to the target market. Thus, the company has to hire,
train and motivate sales people. It has to set up communication and promotion programmes
consisting of advertising, direct marketing, sales promotion and public relations.
It may be noted that the four Ps represent the sellers' view of the marketing tools available for
influencing buyers. From a buyer's point of view, each marketing tool is designed to deliver a
customer benefit. Robert Lauterborn's suggestion was that the four Ps correspond to the
customer's four Cs:
4 Ps 4 Cs
Product
Price
Place
Promotion Customer needs and wants
Cost to the customer
Convenience
Communication
372
Winning companies will be those who can meet customer needs economically and
conveniently and with effective communication.
How these four Ps and four Cs are relevant to marketing?
• Promotion: How the awareness is created among the customers.
• Place: Where the customer wants delivery of product.
• Price: What the customer is ready to pay for this product.
• Product: What are the features of the product.
Kotler says that the starting point of marketing is segmentation, targeting, positioning and
then the role of four Ps starts. However, we have to first convert the four Ps into four Cs that
are
1. Customer value 3. Cost 2. Communication 4. Convenience
Renowned management consultant of US Prof. Jagdish Sheth and Prof. Rajendra Sisodia
have recently introduced the concept of four As against four Ps these are:
• Accessibility • Affordability
• Acceptability • Awareness
The market value coverage = acceptability x affordability x accessibility x awareness. The
four Ps focus on the means while four As focus on the ends. Four As are not mere semantic to
four Ps. You may notice that the "Product" and "Acceptability" may be used alternatively but
acceptability may be created in many ways like changing the brand of existing product, using
appropriate channel, etc.
34.5.2 The Services Marketing Mix
The original marketing-mix was developed for manufacturing industries which required that
the services offered by service companies ought to be changed to be more product-like so that
the existing marketing tools could be applied. This was practically difficult. The marketing
practitioners in the service sector
Product Price Promotion Place People Physical Process
(Service) Level Evidence
Range Discounts Advertising Location Service
Employees Environment Furnishing Policies
Quality Payment Personal Accessibility Atmosphere Procedures
standards Terms selling Coverage Training LayoutSystems
Level' Perceived Sales Channels Discretion Facilitating Goods Use of
;
Branding value promotion commitment Tangible cues technology !
Service lines Price/ Publicity Incentives Warranty Customer
Warranty Quality Public relations Appearance Visual corporate
identity involvement!
After sales Relationship Interpersonal behaviour Peripheral
evidence Customer direction
serviceCredit terms Direct marketing Attitudes Essential evidence
Workflow standardization
Differentiation Customer contact Employee discretion
373
found that the marketing-mix did not fully address their needs. They observed that the basic
characteristics of services had definite marketing implications. For example, the nature of
services is not conducive to standardisation of quality; services cannot be inventoried,
patented or transferred. Hence, specific marketing models and concepts needed development
to take care of the needs of the services sector.
Booms and Bitrier suggested a "7 P" marketing mix model arising out of the above three
observations. Mcgarth and others endorsed such an approach and a number of marketing
research studies supplement the relevance of each of the "7 Ps". It will be observed that the
original four Ps continue, in addition, there are three more sets, viz., People, Physical
evidence and Process.
Figure 34.8 shows the market mix for services.
34.6 LET US SUM UP
Marketing concept is the essence of the process of exchange for mutual satisfaction of the
parties. It is a much broader concept than selling or advertising. With increasing competition,
it has evolved and developed from an activity of the firms to a management function and
further to a business philosophy.
Classification of markets is done into different types, based on the geographical area, product,
nature and volume of transaction. The composition of the numbers of buyers and sellers gives
rise to different types of market situations.
Marketing management comprises four functions namely, analysis, planning, implementation
and control.
Post-nationalisation, banks adopted marketing practices for meeting the competition and the
varied demands of different consumer groups. In the liberalised environment coupled with
advent of IT, banks are adopting a more aggressive and progressive marketing approach and
are now moving to customer relationship management.
Products comprise physical goods and services. There is a continuum of a combination of the
two elements in different proportions. Services have certain distinct features (intangibility,
inseparability, heterogeneity, perishability) which make them different from physical goods
and have a bearing on their marketing. The simultaneous production and consumption of
services, is known as "Servuction Process". Financial services have added feature of fiduciary
responsibility, mainly due to complexity of their nature.
The set of marketing tools used for marketing is marketing-mix, which essentially comprises
variables concerning four Ps, viz., Product, Price, Place and Promotion. The marketing mix
for services has three more Ps, viz., People, Physical Evidence and Process. First, the four Cs
should be understood and then four Ps could be applied. The newly devised concept of four
As focuses on ends.
34.7 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS
A.I. State whether following statements are True or False:
(a) Geographical place where goods can be bought or sold is also a market.
(b) The scope of marketing is limited to physical goods.
(c) Marketing is selling.
2. Fill in the blanks:
(a) Marketing implies 'meeting needs
(b) The businesses became customer and market driven due to increased
(c) Marketing identifies and the customer requirements.
374
B. Fill in the blanks -
1. Unless aggressive efforts are made to
Banks' deposits and credit schemes, there
2. 3. 4. 5.
and
could be under-utilisation of the banking infrastructure.
The new generation private sector banks have focused on
Product can be a or
In service products the
and.
takes place simultaneously.
Bank marketing is aimed at providing services to satisfy customer's needs.
C. Match the followings:
(i) Product
(ii) Price
(iii) Place
(iv) Promotion
(a) Convenience
(b) Communication
(c) Cost
(d) (d)Customer value 1. Affordability
2. Awareness
3. Acceptability
4. Accessibility
34.8 ANSWERS TO CHECK YOUR PROGRESS'
A. 1. (a) T, (b) F, (c) F; 2. (a) profitably, (b) competition, (c) satisfies
B. 1. market, 2. technology, high networth customers, 3. physical object, service, 4.
production,
consumption, 5. financial.
C. (i)-(d)-(3), (ii)-(c)-(l
34.9 KEYWORDS
Market, Exchange, Marketing, Customer Relationship Management, Services, Servuction
Process, Marketing Mix.
CONSUMER BEHAVIOUR AND PRODUCT
STRUCTURE
35.0 Objectives
35.1 Introduction
35.2 Consumer Behaviour
35.2.1 Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs
35.2.2 Family Life Cycle
35.2.3 Learning and Habit Development
35.2.4 Influence on Decision-making
35.2.5 Customer Relationship Management
35.2.6 Gap Analysis
35.2.7 Changing Loyalty
35.3 Understanding "Product"
35.3.1 Definition
35.3.2 Product Planning
35.3.3 New Product Development
35.4 Product Strategies
35.4.1 Product Modification
35.4.2 Product Elimination
35.4.3 Diversification
35.5 Other Aspects of Product Development
35.5.1 Branding
35.5.2 Packaging
35.5.3 Labeling
35.6 Let Us Sum Up
35.7 Check Your Progress
35.8 Answers to 'Check Your Progress'
35.9 Keywords
376
35.0 OBJECTIVES
In this unit, we seek to know and understand (in the context of marketing):
• Consumer behaviour, customer relationship management and gap analysis
• Product and its categories
• Process of product development
• Concept of product life cycle
• Strategies for product management
35.1 INTRODUCTION
Customer is the king of the market. All activities are cantered on the customer. Product, the
most important component of marketing-mix, is a key element in the market offering. The
product is the pivot around which the other elements revolve. It does not undermine the
importance of the other elements, nay, these elements, in fact, facilitate the acceptance of
product by the market. So, distribution strategies aim to make the product available when and
where the market wants it. Pricing is concerned with making the product available at a price
that is attractive to the customer and profitable to the firm. Finally, promotion element seeks
to communicate the potential benefits available to the market from the product arising from
its design, distribution and price attributes. Planning of a marketing-mix commences with
formulating an offering to meet the target customer's needs or wants.
The success of marketing lies in managing the products in a manner, which would result in a
product having the desired effect on the customers. It requires understanding the nature of
products and their relationship with the customer's needs. It also requires understanding how
the customer response changes over a period to the products and its impact on marketing
strategies. In bank marketing, the service product is developed around the consumer
choice/needs/preferences. The marketing strategy also depends upon the customer needs.
Hence, an understanding of consumer behaviour is a necessity before understanding the
product development and management. Marketing is an approach to exchange relationships,
which provides the driving force for formulation of strategies by every type of organisation.
It is an important socio-economic activity.
35.2 CONSUMER BEHAVIOUR
35.2.1 Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs
While considering the marketing of a product, whether a physical or a service product, we
must understand the customer's need as per Maslow's theory of hierarchy of needs and human
behaviour:
Physiological needs fo od, drink, oxygen, sleep
Safety needs avoidance/protection from threatening situation and
economic security
Social needs friendship, affection and sense of belonging
Esteem needs self-respect, recognition, status and success
Self-actualisation self-fulfilment
35.2.2 Family Life Cycle
Every thing has a life cycle during which changes keep taking place. Similarly, for a human
being, the study of life cycle is important from the angle of marketing. The family life cycle
is divided into four stages and the financial status vis-a-vis banking needs are given in the
Table 35.1.
377
TABLE 35.1 Financial Situation versus Banking Needs
Stage Financial Situation Banking Needs
Young Bachelor Per capita income high, as no dependants. Few financial burdens.
Credit cards, auto loan, low cost banking services
Mortgage loan, credit card, overdraft, durables loan
Half nest (married with young children) Home buying priority, low liquidity
Full nest (older couple, grown up children) services Income stabilised, good financial
position Home improvement, equity invest¬ment, flexi-deposit, investment
Social security services, some loans
Empty nest (older couple) Significantly reduced income
35.2.3 Learning and Habit Development
An individual's buying behaviour is influenced by his perception of himself and the things
around him. His perception is affected by his self-concept, needs, motivation, and knowledge,
past experience, feelings, attitudes and personality. The consumer behaviour is also
influenced by the learning and developing new habits. As an objective of marketing, the
consumer is taught the use of the product. Learning is a trial and error process whereby
needs, motives or drives are triggered by some cue to cause the individual to respond in an
effort to satisfy the need. The advertisement may work as a cue while purchase is a response
to the cue. The repeated advertisement reinforces the learning process. When learning is
reinforced a lot and repeat behaviour is produced, it may result in a purchasing habit.
The marketers break habit by giving free samples, introductory trial offer and special
discount on opening and generate new clientele. In habit acquisition, an attempt is made to
build a product preference habit. Once consumer makes the purchase, the habit reinforcement
is done to get them to remain habitual users.
35.2.4 Influence on Decision-making
Man's attitude and behaviour are influenced by several levels of society culture, sub-cultures,
social classes, reference groups and face-to-face groups. The most enduring influences are
from culture. Man tends to assimilate his culture's mores and folkways until he interacts with
members of other culture. Subcultures are regional entities, religion, nationality, fraternal
order provide broad identification to the person and thus influence his decision-making
process for buying product. The individual at times needs to identify himself with a reference
group even though he may not be a formal member of such group. The behaviour of the
group influences his buying decision.
Face-to-face group many a time gives an individual the support for decision-making. This
group consists of friends, colleagues, neighbours, family members, etc.
35.2.5 Customer Relationship Management
Relationship marketing is the attracting, maintaining and nurturing relationship with
customer in a multi-service organisation aimed at customer relations.
Objectives of Relationship Marketing
• long-term customer retention
• relationship with external market who influence or provide referrals
• integrating marketing activities, customer service and quality standards
CRM concept and the database becomes the focal point for all marketing activities from
customer loyalty programmes to internal communication.
378
TABLE 35.2 Comparison Between Transaction Marketing and Relationship Marketing
Transaction Marketing
Single Sale Focus Relationship Marketing
Customer Retention Focus
Product Feature Oriented Product Benefit Oriented
Short-time Frame Long-time Scale
Low Emphasis on Customer Service Moderate Customer Contact Moderate Quality Concern
High Emphasis on Customer Service High Customer Contact High Quality Concern
Activities under CRM
1. Establish and maintain a customer information database
2. Planning customer contact points
3. Analysing informal customer feedback
4. Conducting customer satisfaction survey
5. Managing communication programmes
6. Hosting special events
7. Auditing and reclaiming lost customers
35.2.6 Gap Analysis
The CRM tries to close the gap in the customer perception and the firm's perception by
finding and analysing the "GAP".
The first gap is between the service expected by the customer and company perception of
consumer expectations. It occurs due to inadequate market research orientation, lack of
upward communication and insufficient relationship focus.
Expected Services
Gap 5
Perceived Delivery
Gap 4
Gap1 Service Delivery External Communications to Customer
Gap 3
Customer driven service
designs and standards
Gap 2
Company perceptions of
Customer expectations
379
The next is between the customer driven service designs and standards vs. company
perception of consumer expectations about the service designs and standards. This occurs due
to an absence of customer driven standards, inadequate service leadership and poor service
design.
The third gap is about delivery of service perceived by the customer and the firm's perception
about customer expectations. This, is caused by deficiencies in HR policies, failure to match
supply and demand and customers not fulfilling roles.
In the next stage, there lies the gap between the service delivery to the customer and external
communication to the customer by the firm. This is the result of ineffective management of
customer expectations, over promising and inadequate horizontal communication.
Fifth gap is the ultimate gap between expected service and perceived service, which is the
result of all the above gaps.
The gap analysis is exhibited in the Figure 35.1.
35.2.7 Changing Loyalty
In banking services, retaining the existing customer has become a big challenge. The more
the banks are improvising their systems and mechanism for better relationships, the more the
customers are losing loyalty to the bank. Earlier the customer hesitated to move to other
banks and preferred to wait for months together for a simple loan sanction from its bank, but
now even for the deposit product, the customer does not mind shifting his business to other
bank where he gets better-returns. The customer has become more informative about the
products, rates, rights and obligations and has become cost conscious. The relationship
marketing will help bankers to live up to the expectations of the customers and retain the
existing customers.
35.3 UNDERSTANDING "PRODUCT"
35.3.1 Definition
Kotler has defined product thus:
A product is anything that can be offered to a market for attention, acquisition, use or
consumption that might satisfy a want or need.
Theodore Levitt has described product as:
To the buyer, a product is a complex cluster of value satisfactions. ... A customer attaches
value to a product in proportion to its perceived ability to help solve his problems, or meet his
needs. . . . The product is the total package of benefits the customer receives when he buys
it. ...
Product Personality
Products comprise several components, which impart meaning to it and project its distinct
images. Thus, products have a personality.
The Core Features
The Associated Features
The Brand Name and Logo
The Package and Lebel
FIGURE 35.2 Components of Product Personality
380
For example, savings bank account has a core feature of operational convenience and fetches
some interest income. Associated features, like chequebook facility comes with it. Every
bank has given a distinct brand name to the SB product such as "Suvidha Bachat Khata". The
transactions in the attractive passbook of the account are neatly printed is equivalent to the
packaging of physical product.
Product Levels
A product has a customer value hierarchy - emerging from the five levels of the product,
namely, core benefit (soap implies "cleanliness", convenience of operation and some interest
earning), basic product (a business centre includes a cabin, a table and chairs, telephone
connection, lights, air-conditioning, savings bank account with cheque book facility),
expected product (bank customers expect correct accounting of their transactions, getting
withdrawals of their money on demand, correct and timely interest receipts) augmented
product (an airlines offers executive waiting lounges at the airports with facilities for shower,
refreshments, newspapers and periodicals, internet and fax connections; savings bank account
with anywhere banking facility, debit card at no cost, demat accounts at discounted fees), and
potential product (possible future augmentations, like electronic cheques, access through a
special display telephone that dispenses a snapshot statement). Today, success in marketing is
not merely satisfying the customers but delighting them with unanticipated benefits. The
competition today essentially takes place at the augmented product level and the firms strive
to reach the potential product level. The product levels are exhibited in Figure 35.3.
Potential Product
Augmented Product
Expected Product
Basic 1
Product
Core
Benefit
FIGURE 35.3 Five Product Levels Product Categories
Based on different aspects like durability, tangibility and use, products can be classified in
various categories, which determine the appropriate marketing strategy. Thus, we have one
set of categories non-durable goods (tangible goods which are consumed during uses -
shampoo, hair oil), durable goods (tangible goods which have longer use - cooking range,
computer) and services (massage, courier, bank loans). Another set of categories is consumer
goods (bought by the individual users) and industrial goods (bought by the organisations).
Product Item, Product Line and Product Mix
A seller offers to the buyers a range of products which is referred to as a Product Mix, which
may comprise different groups of products that are closely related called Product Lines. Each
product line
381
consists of several specific Product Items. Example of product mix, banks have assets
products (advances) and liabilities products (deposits). Within these divisions, banks have
different product lines namely, consumer lending, vehicle finance, corporate finance, trade
finance, term deposits, etc. Each of these product lines will be offering several products or
product items, like fixed deposit, reinvestment plan, recurring deposit etc. The number of
items gives each product line Length and the number of lines in a product mix gives it the
Width. The number of variants of each item gives the Depth packaging to that item. Say, if
"Surf Excel" is available in three pack sizes, and in two types of packaging, then it has a
depth of six. The extent to which various product lines are related in end use, product
requirements, etc., determines the Consistency of the product mix.
The Banking Product
Banks are in the business of accepting deposits for lending or investment. The distinguishing
feature of banking from the finance companies is the payment and settlement facility it
provides to its customers. What constitutes a banking product? Is it each individual service in
which bank is engaged say clearing of cheques, execution of standing instructions, etc., or the
entire package of services provided by the bank is a single product? While there can be
several views on this issue, one generally accepted view is that a banking product is:
"a service or a package of services that -
(i) is typically provided for anyone consumer by one bank only, the customer may buy
different product items or product lines from different banks but the bundle or package under
one product item cannot be purchased from different banks. Customer cannot keep account in
one bank and obtain chequebook from another bank.
(ii) is aimed at a particular market."
A banking product may alter according to changes in purchasing preferences or the
promotional emphasis. A typical retail banking product mix is given in the Table 35.3.
TABLE 35.3 Retail Banking Product Mix
Regular Account Deposits Loans Other Services
Saving Account Fixed Deposits Vehicle Loan Telephone Bill Payment
Current Account Cumulative Fixed Deposits Housing Loan Safe Deposit Lockers
Anywhere Banking Account Recurring Deposits Personal Loan Demand Drafts
Senior Citizens' Accounts Multiple Unit Deposits Credit Card Gold Credit Card
Festival Loan Holiday Lone Bankers' Cheques Mail Transfer Cash Remittances Demat
Accounts
35.3.2 Product Planning
Product planning comprises the process of developing and maintaining a portfolio of
products, which satisfy the needs and wants of customers from different segments. Such
product planning has to ensure maximum utilisation of skills and resources of an
organisation. The process of product planning consists of determining the strategies in respect
of various elements: Product Line, Product Mix, Branding, Packaging and New Product
Development.
382
The following are main tasks in managing the product mix:
• Appraisal of each product line and each product item
• Decisions on packaging '
• Product differentiation and positioning
• Managing brands and developing brand equity
• New product development
• Managing the product life cycle of products/brands
• Managing product quality
Product Life Cycle
An ardent observer will notice that over a period, most products disappear while new ones
emerge. Products, like living beings, have a life cycle. This concept of product life cycle is
one of the fundamental notions and affects the marketing strategies substantially. This
concept implies that:
• Products have a limited lifespan
• Sales of a product during its lifespan passes through distinct stages
• Each of the stages poses different challenges, opportunities and problems
• Profits rise and fall at different stages
• Different marketing strategies are required for each of the four stages
Typically, the sales curve of any product during its lifespan is bell shaped as shown in the
Figure 35.4.
Introduction Maturity
Growth
Decline
s
A L
E S
TIME j
FIGURE 35.4 Sales Curve
The stage of conception and product development comes before it is launched in the market;
hence, four stages are considered in the life cycle, which are:
(a) Introduction: Period of initial low sales and slow pick up in the market where the
habit and learning
of product is taking place so there is slow growth in sales, with no profits due to heavy
development and introductory expenses incurred. Net banking and mobile banking are two
examples of banking products that are in introductory stage.
(b) Growth: Sales grow rapidly due to fast increasing market acceptance resulting in
substantial
383
improvement in profits. Many retail loans are still in growth stage. RTGS and NEFT products
for remittance of funds are in the growth stage.
(c) Maturity: A slow down in sales growth rate leading to peaking of sales, due to the
potential buyers having been fully tapped. Profits may stabilise or may decline due to
increasing marketing expenses. Traditional products are in maturity stage in banking services.
(d) Decline: Sales at this stage experience a declining rate of growth and profits erode.
Demand draft is in the decline stage as better-featured remittance product is already a hit the
market.
Not all products pass through all these stages. Again, the lifespan of different products varies
significantly. Certain products witness a very fast increase in sales and face a rapid decline;
such products have a very short lifespan. In the recent past, the pager was one such product,
which saw decline and ultimately death before it could get well into the growth and maturity
stage due to introduction of cellular phones. In banking also, there are examples of products,
which fail to grow fully. The cash certificate, education loan schemes of individual banks are
examples from banking industry. There are some products having prolonged maturity stage.
Landline telephone is an illustration from telecom industry. This was possible because the
physical design of the telephone instrument underwent many changes. The product
improvement is necessary for prolonging the maturity stage.
The banking industry in India has also witnessed the products of varying life cycles. Core
products like savings bank accounts, fixed deposits have been for a long period and are
continuing in the maturity stage. On the other hand, some of the deposit schemes like cash
certificates and annuity deposits appeared on the scene in the wake of intense competition for
deposit mobilisation and rapidly declined. With the advent of technology, some of the age-old
veteran products have become or are on the verge of becoming extinct. Traveller's cheque,
mail transfers are no longer on the active product shelf because of Core Banking Solution and
card products.
Marketing Characteristics of Different Stages
Each stage of the product life cycle has certain peculiar characteristics related to marketing of
the product. A brief overview of this is given in the Table 35.4.
There are certain product-based marketing strategies, which the firms adopt to address the
challenges arising out of the passage of a product through its life cycle. Some of the
important marketing strategies are discussed in this chapter.
Marketing Mix in Different Stages
At different stages a product will need different marketing mix for achieving the desired
objectives. Table 35.5 shows the marketing mix for various stages to give an idea about the
distinction among various stages.
The life stages of same product may be different in different markets. Hence, the marketing
strategies to be adopted should be product and region specific keeping in mind the consumer
behaviour aspects of that market.
35.3.3 New Product Development
The fact that products have a distinct life cycle leads to the need for product development by
the firms. A firm, which after having begun with one or more products, continues to depend
on them and does not add new product will soon find itself in a situation when its sales will
first stagnate and then start falling, as most of its products enter first the maturity stage and
then the decline stage. Ultimately, it will find that its market is taken over by the competitors
and its product will die. An example is that of the "Fiat" car in the Indian market. Thus, in
order to have a healthy growth in sales and even to maintain the sales at a level, it is essential
for the firms to continue to add new products to their portfolio. The
384
TABLE 35.4 Life Cycle
Stages
Sales Introduction Growth Maturity Decline
Low Fast Growth Slow Growth Decline
c Profit Marginal or Rapid rise Falling margins Low margin
H even loss
g Strategic Need to deve- Expand market Protect marketCut costs, and
thrust lop market by penetrating share by retain- reposition pro-
r deeper ing customers duct to revive
a sales or with-
c draw the product
t Customer Non-users will- Tapping different Shed segmentsSelective,
e targets ing to try new customer groups explore new
products and form markets
r segments
i Competition Competitors are J Intensive and Many efficientLimited
s few, and less growing with ones
t known time
J Differential Superior perfor- Brand name, Price, unique Business
c advantage mance, new corporate serviceexperience, low
benefit and identity cost producer
features
TABLE 35.5 Various Stages for Marketing Mix
Stages
Sales 1 Introduction f GrowthMaturity Decline
M Product Unique offering Improvement in Different variety
Rationalise
a the offering range
r Price Low or premium (Low with high Maintain margin Low margin
k volume
e Promotion Incentive to use Intensive Parity, loyalty Reduced to
t formation threshold level
( for reminder
n Advertising To create and Brand name, Value for money Rationalise
y Focus build awareness performance
M Distribution Building network Fast spread out Create niche Limit coverage
I territory or enter new
market and build
X network
customers will want new products and the competitors will strive to provide them thus
creating competitive pressures.
In this scenario, the firms face risks on two fronts. One, as mentioned above, the firms runs a
great risk from the competition, if they do not develop new products. On the other hand, new
product development is risky. Most of the products entering the markets fail and it results in
heavy losses. In the USA, certain
385
researches have shown that the failure rate of products is around 75 to 80 per cent This has
been found not only in the case of packaged goods but also in the case of financial products
and services, like credit cards, insurance plans, etc. Today, retail banking is the mantra of
banking industry and the consumer loan products are in growth stage. But, nearly two
decades ago the "Big Buy Scheme" of State Bank of India, providing loan for consumer
durables, met with a dismal fate.
The process of product development comprises of following five main stages:
(a) Idea screening (b) Concept testing
(c) Product development (d) Test marketing
(e) Commercial launch
Idea Screening
Ideas are necessary for a firm to develop a new product. These can come from various
sources: customers, technical experts, employees, competitors, channel members, and top
management. There are also other specialised sources like inventors, research institutions,
advertising agencies and consultants. The needs and wants of the customers should generally
form the basis for the ideas. For example, the idea of a loan product for upgrading the kutcha
school buildings to concrete buildings based on the Kumbakonam incidence. The technology
also provides a basis for product development: Auto conversion and reversion of balance in
savings bank account into/from fixed deposit. Generating a large number of ideas is
important to be able to strike at an idea, which will lead eventually to developing a new
product. Various techniques could be used for generation of ideas - like brainstorming
sessions, surveys for need/ idea identification, suggestion scheme for staff or others, etc.
The large number of ideas pooled is then reduced to a more manageable size. The criteria
generally adopted for this short listing are:
• Should fit into the overall strategy of the firm
• Should build on the resources and the skills (technological, financial and managerial)
of the firm
• Should have sufficient market potential
Screening of ideas is an important function as an error at this stage has long-term
implications. There are two types of possible errors:
• DROP-error, when an otherwise good idea is dismissed.
• DO-error, when a poor idea graduates to development and commercialisation stage.
Both types of errors prove to be costly. Concept Development and Testing
The selected idea has to be developed into testable product concept. Several product concepts
may emerge from an idea. Different product concepts may fall into different category
concepts. Depending on the category, the competing products are determined, which
influence the positioning of the product. Before a product can be developed based on the
concept, it needs to be tested in the market. Consumer reactions are obtained by using a
verbal description or a physical product. Candid opinions of the consumers are sought. Based
on the responses, it is judged whether the concept has a strong appeal. It also helps in
determining the competitor products and the target customer segment.
The concept is also put through a business analysis to evaluate its commercial attractiveness.
Based on the analysis, it is determined whether, on business considerations, the firm's
objectives are met. The business analysis besides including the assessment of sales and
profits also includes an assessment of the risk involved in introducing the new product. The
extent of risk is proportional to the degree of newness. The amount of risk is lower if existing
production facilities and marketing capabilities can be used.
386
Product Development
The product concept is next developed into the product. Prototype of the product is made
embodying in it, as many of the attributes as possible which the final product will have. The
information on consumer preferences needs to be communicated to the team making the
prototypes. The packaging and other associated aspects like distribution, etc., are also
developed at this stage. These prototypes are subjected to use by some sample consumers to
ascertain their reactions to the product. Launching the financial Inclusion scheme in one
district and later extending it to other districts will form a perfect example to this.
Test Marketing
The next stage is to introduce the product to the market and know the real-life reactions.
Usually, a new product in the final stage of development is promoted in a small market area.
This is the stage of test marketing. Its objectives are:
• To test the product in authentic consumer settings
• To learn the size of the market
• To know how the consumers and dealers react to handling, using and repurchasing the
actual
product
The extent of market testing and its manner are influenced by certain factors. If the product
involves high capital investment for production and/or distribution facilities and high risk due
to novel features or a new-product category, the need for market testing is greater. Cost of
market testing is another factor which affects the extent of testing and its kind.
The product may be test marketed in only one area or in two or more areas. Where test
marketing covers more than one area, different promotional strategies may be adopted in each
area so that these are also pre-tested. The benefits of test marketing are:
• More reliable forecast of future sales
• An opportunity to decide about launching or dropping the product
• Determining the better promotional strategies
Launching
The final stage is that of full-scale launch in the market. This is a stage which requires
committing resources to the largest extent. The two functions which involve substantial costs
are manufacturing and marketing. Decisions on the following aspects need careful scrutiny
for launching a product:
• Timing of launch • Geographical reach
• Prospect consumer groups • Market strategy
Growth Strategies
One of the objectives of the firms is to continuously increase their sales and profit. At some
point of time, a firm faces a situation that the expected sales and profit from its existing
businesses do not reach the desired levels. The firms need to adopt suitable strategies to fill
this strategic gap. The firms can adopt three possible approaches:
• Identify opportunities for further growth within the existing businesses (Intensive
Growth)
• Identify opportunities to build or acquire businesses related to the existing businesses
(Integrcitive
Growth)
• Identify opportunities to add attractive businesses, unrelated to the existing businesses
{Diversification Growth)
387
A useful device for identifying growth opportunities is the market/product expansion grid
shown in the following Figure.35.5.
Products
Existing New
Market penetration Product development
Market Development Diversification
Existing
New
FIGURE 35.5 Market/Product Expansion Grid
This grid may also be used to make an analysis of the marketing personality/outlook of the
individual/ firm. This is exhibited in Figure 35.6.
Products
Existing New
Immobile non-innovative Immobile Innovative
Mobile non-innovative Mobile innovative
Existing
New
FIGURE 35.6 Analysis of the marketing personality / outlook of the
Individual/firm
35.4 PRODUCT STRATEGIES
Marketing strategies which are based on the product element are called product strategies.
Product strategies are of two types:
(a) Strategies based on "Product Mix"
(b) Strategies based on "Product Life Cycle"
There are several strategies which firms adopt falling under the above categories. Some major
strategies are product modification, product elimination and diversification.
35.4.1 Product Modification
In the maturity stage of its life cycle, the sales of a product decline. At this stage, efforts to
stimulate sales of the products are made by modifying the product's characteristics. This is
achieved through improvement in: quality and performance, and features or style of the
product.
(a) Quality improvement: This is done with the objective of improving the functional
performance
(durability, reliability, speed) of the product.
(b) Feature improvement: This implies addition of new features for expanding the
products' versatility,
safety or convenience.
(c) Style improvement: This is aimed at increasing the aesthetic appeal of the product.
The purpose of making such modifications is to get more consumers interested in using the
product and to retain the customers likely to switch to competing products. The advantages of
product modification are:
388
• Builds the firm's image of progressiveness and leadership.
• Addition or deletion of features can be done in a short time and the new features could
even be
made optional at extra cost.
• Helps in winning loyalty of certain segments.
• Serves as a promotion vehicle.
• Helps in building up the enthusiasm of the sales personnel.
At the same time, there are some risks associated with product modification. The consumer
may not like the new style or changes made. A modification implies either the old product is
discontinued totally or it is discounted, thereby alienating the old customers of the product.
35.4.2 Product Elimination
In the decline stage, the sales of a product are low but the costs are high. Weak products
demand more resources in terms of the time management and marketing personnel. These
also require greater marketing efforts and higher expenses. Some products may reach a stage
that their demand reduces to almost nil level, in spite of marketing strategies and
programmes. In such cases, the firms need to take a view on the continuation of the product.
One of the strategies is to drop a weak product from the product line. The major reasons for
product elimination are:
• Sales keep declining continuously and there is no possibility of increasing sales.
• Profits keep declining continuously and there is no possibility of improving profits.
• Product prices are declining continuously and it may be difficult for the firm to supply
at the prevailing market price.
• Product is no more effective in achieving the desired objective, and there is no
possibility of this happening in future.
• Emergence and growth of substitute products may drive the product out of market
• Excessive administration expenditure and time.
35.4.3 Diversification
Diversification refers to entering attractive opportunities which are outside the existing
businesses of the firm. When a firm identifies a highly attractive industry and when the
requisite business mix strengths are already present in it, it has an attractive business
opportunity for diversification. Three types of diversification are generally observed:
(a) Concentric diversification: The new products have technological and/or marketing
synergies with existing product lines, though the target groups of customers are entirely
different, e.g. an audiocassette manufacturer introduces computer tape manufacture.
(b) Horizontal diversification: The new products appeal to the existing customers though
the products are technologically unrelated to existing product lines. An audiocassette
manufacturer starts manufacturing cassette holding trays, though it requires different
technology and process.
(c) Conglomerate diversification: The new products or businesses have no relationship to
the existing technology, products or market of the firm. An audiocassette manufacturer enters
into fax machines or diet products businesses.
35.5 OTHER ASPECTS OF PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT
A product comprises, apart from the core physical product or service, a brand name and some
packaging.
35.5.1 Branding
A brand is a name, term, sign, symbol or design or a combination of these. Brand has become
an
389
important part of the product as they import a perceived value to the product. In the present
age, not only the manufactured goods but even farm products like wheat, rice, fruits and
vegetables have been branded. Branding of service products is not new to us. Life Insurance
Corporation brought out its products with brand names even when there was no competition.
Banks brand their products and customers are being familiarised with these brand names.
Consumers buy brands and brands generates income for the firm. One does not ask for
toothpaste but asks for Colgate; not for a fruit salt but Eno, and not for salt but TATA salt.
Often brands take the position of generic names, especially when it was the introducer of the
product. For example, Xerox (for photocopying machine and process, it has almost become a
verb and a noun and an adjective in the English language) and Dalda (for vegetable oil).
The branding practice has resulted in certain benefits to both the buyers and the sellers.
Buyers can identify the products easily and tells them something about the quality. Buyers
know they can expect the same features, benefits and quality each time they buy a brand. The
sellers can link the qualities of the product to its brand. Sellers can segment the markets by
having similar products catering to these segments, under different brands. It also helps in
legal protection in respect of the unique features of the product.
Brands represent consumers' perceptions and feelings about a product and its performance.
The value of a brand is its power to capture consumer preference and loyalty. The positive
differential effect that knowing a brand name has on consumer response to a product or
service, is called as the brand equity. A brand with strong brand equity is a valuable asset. It
also carries economic value. A powerful brand enjoys a high level of consumer brand
awareness and loyalty. The focus of marketing is on building customer equity with brand
management. Coca-Cola paid for acquiring Parle's brands, Thumps Up and Limca. Godrej
paid for acquiring Good Knight and Hit from Transelektra.
Seven financial institutions found place in the list of top 100 brands. Most of them were from
North American and European region. Branding in the banks used to display the trust and
confidence because the customers' preference was security of money. But, with the
deregulation, competition and technology revolution, the banks are not looked upon merely
as a place to keep money safe but more as financial convenience. Banks have identified
themselves with catchy slogans to create the brand. "The citi never sleeps" (Citi Bank), "The
world's local bank" (HSBC), "Trusted family bank" (Dena Bank), "Building Relationship
Beyond Time" and now "Taking Technology to the Common Man" (Indian Bank), "Good
people to grow with" (IOB), "India's International Bank" (Bank of Baroda) - are some of the
examples of branding bank services. There are four stages of branding in banking services as
shown in Figure 35.07.
In the first stage, the customers based on brand identify the company. Then, a new product
branding takes place which is completely different from the company's brand. In the third
stage, the brand is given a strategic role to focus on the company's vision or core competence.
In the last stage, the company becomes a brand driven organisation where the management
team leads the subordinates to brand vision in all regular activities.
In their journey through these stages, banks have attempted to create a brand image for
themselves and also for their products. In this process, they have also used brand ambassador
like Amitabh Bachchan, Rahul Dravid, Hema Malini, Juhi Chawla.
Major initiatives with regard to branding and marketing include: creating unique customer
ambience, cross-selling of products, linkage with service providers and payment of utility
bills and value-added services.
Co-branding is defined by Philip Kotler as a combination of two or more well-known brands
in an offer. Each brand expects to strengthen the business by reaching new customers. Co-
branding of credit/ debit cards by banks or insurance and banking companies are examples of
how the co-brands work in
390High
Role of Branding
within
Business
Strategies Centre-Piece of Corporate Strategy
Catalyst for Corporate Change
New Subsidiary Development
Identification
Low High
FIGURE 35.7 Value of brand to business
banking sector. Even the names of lead mangers, syndicate managers and bankers to the issue
work as co-brands in the minds of customers.
Building a brand involves brand positioning, brand name selection and brand development.
Brands can be positioned in the minds of the consumers on product attributes, benefits and
beliefs and values. A brand becomes the firm's promise to the consumer in respect of features,
benefits, services and experiences a product will deliver to them. A good brand name aids
product's success greatly. Hence, selection of a brand name is important. It should be easy to
recall, should suggest some product benefits and be distinctive. There are several options for
brand development depending on the mix of product category and brand name as indicated in
the Figure 35.8.
(a) Line extension: It is introduction of additional items in an existing product category under
the same brand name, say with new ingredients, form, flavours or package size. It is a low-
cost low-risk way of introduction of new products to meet desires for variety. HLL launched
Surf Ultra, Surf Excel, Surf Excelmatic and International Surf Excel as line extensions of
Surf. No-frills savings bank account, multi-city chequebook facility, sweep facility are
variants of savings bank account.
Product Category
Existing New
Line extensionBrand extension
Multi brands New brands
Existing
Brand Name
New figurE 35.8 Brand Development Strategies
391
(b) Brand extension: It is use of an existing brand name to launch new or modified
products in a new category. It provides immediate recognition and quick acceptance to new
products. Enfield brand was used for motorcycles. It later was used for television and gen-
sets. Vehicle loans were available to transport operators, now they are made available with
modifications to retail and agri-customers also.
(c) Multi-brands: It is introducing additional brands in an existing product category. This
facilitates catering to different buying motives and distinguishes different features. RTGS and
NEFT are new brands in remittance product category.
(d) New brands: It is in using a new brand name for a new product, either when entering a
new product category or when it is felt that the existing brand power is waning. With the
relaxation in norms for remittances abroad, the new products with new brand names have
emerged in the market.
(e) Co-branding: It is seen in the credit card business of the banks. Banks have co-
branded their cards with Airlines (Indian/Jet) Oil companies (HP/IOC) and major retail
outlets. Co-branding helps in making the bank's brand more visible, at the same time it gives
good fee income.
35.5.2 Packaging
Products need to reach the consumer from the factory in a convenient manner. For this
purpose they need to be packaged. The function comprising the activities of designing and
producing a suitable container for the product is called packaging. A product may need
several layers of packaging:
• Primary package: The products primary container (say, a plastic or glass bottle
containing shampoo.)
• Secondary package: A package in which the container is kept and which is usually
thrown away just before the use of the product, (say, cardboard box containing the toothpaste
tube.)
• Shipping package: A package necessary to store, identify and ship several units of a
product (say, cardboard carton containing twelve dozens of toilet soap cakes.)
Packaging also includes printed information appearing on or with the package termed as
label.
The package currently performs more than the traditional functions of containing and
protecting the product. It has become a potent marketing tool. It performs several tasks
including attracting customer attention, describing the product and making the sale. A well
designed "package" creates convenience value for the customer and promotional value for the
manufacturer. Innovative packaging can give an advantage over competitors. Besides the
marketing functions, packaging also serves two other important functions. These are
consumer safety and tamper prevention.
The first step in developing a package is evolving the packaging concept. It lays down the
basic functions of the package for the product. Next, the decisions on other elements like the
size, shape, materials, colour, text, etc., are taken. The package is subjected to certain tests
from engineering and marketing viewpoints, which include engineering tests, visual tests,
dealer tests, and consumer tests.
Packaging also has an important social aspect of environmental concern. It can relate to the
disposal of packages (disposal of non-returnable glass or plastic containers causes severe
solid waste disposal problem - the ubiquitous "dabba batliwala" deserves to be fecilitated for
rendering an important social service) or use of natural resources (excessive use of paper).
Faced with increasing competition, marketers are adopting innovative packaging to give their
products a distinctive position. Innovations in packaging have also been prompted by some
felt need of the consumer like convenience in use, ease of opening or carrying, longer shelf
life, etc.
There are numerous examples from daily life of fast moving consumer items where major
changes in packaging have transformed the products to a great extent. Shampoos were earlier
coming only in bottles. After introduction of shampoo sachets, it has reached a wider section
of consumers and also
it ;« nnw ako fniind on the stalls at railwav stations. With cold cream becoming available in
tubes, it has
392
become a carry along item, instead of a dressing table item. Refill packs, now being used for
several food products like tea, coffee, health drinks, cooking oil, etc., have added to
convenience and reduced costs significantly. The packaging is equally important in the
service industry. The bank passbook containing transaction details, the fixed deposit receipt is
the primary packing while plastic folder in which it is delivered may be treated as secondary
packing.
35.5.3 Labelling
A label is an integrated part of packaging, but it is very significant and of vital importance.
The main functions performed by labels are:
• Identifying the product or brand
• Describing information about the product, manufacturer, user instructions and other
prescribed particulars
• Promoting the product through attractive graphics
Labels need to be reviewed and redesigned periodically as they become "stale" over a period
of time, so that the consumer interest is revived. This can be an easy and low cost method of
giving a touch of "freshness" to the product itself.
Labels need to conform to the regulatory requirements of the information contents, and text
sizes, etc. After the recent legislation requiring all food products to display a specific "dot"
symbol, to indicate whether or not they are vegetarian, numerous manufacturers were
required to make modifications in labels of innumerable food products.
35.6 LET US SUM UP
The Maslow's need theory and family life cycle are important tools to identify customer need
for focussed marketing of products and positioning the right product in the right target
market. Customer develops a perception about the product under the influence of needs,
knowledge, motivation or experience, feelings, attitudes and personality. Habit development
is an important exercise in marketing. The decision to buy or not to buy is influenced by the
various social groups in which the customer moves, hence, relationship marketing is
preferred over the transaction marketing. Customer relationship management is a very
important part of marketing. The gap analysis helps us to understand the customer perception
and firm's perception so that an attempt is made to close the gap in the world of fast changing
loyalty. Anything which can satisfy a want or a need and can be offered to a market is a
product. Product includes physical goods, services, persons, places, organisations and ideas.
Offerings generally have a goods-service mix. A product personality comprises, besides the
core product, associated features, brand name and logo and package and label. Product has
customer value hierarchy of five levels covering the core benefit, basic product, expected
product, augmented product and potential product. The focus of the businesses, shifted from
selling the products to understanding the requirements of the customers and now, to knowing
and anticipating their needs and striving to satisfy these needs. The approach is of taking a
holistic view of the customer relationship and its management.
Products are classified into several categories based on different aspects. The range of
products offered by a seller is known as product mix, which comprises several product lines,
each containing different product items. These determine the characteristics like length,
width, depth and consistency of a product mix.
Products have a life cycle with four phases of introduction, growth, maturity and decline. The
product life cycle operates on three levels - product, product sub-category and brand. Product
modification is a widely used strategy for marketing especially in maturity stage. Product
elimination is an appropriate strategy for dealing with products in their decline stage.
393
New product development is another strategy adopted by the firms with a view to providing
customers with products that will satisfy the customers' needs and wants. This becomes
necessary because of the competitors' actions, changing consumer preferences and
technological advancements. The process of new product development is intricate involving
idea generation, concept development and testing, product development, test marketing and
commercial launch.
A related strategy is diversification in which a firm enters attractive business opportunity
outside its existing businesses based on some of the requisite business strength being
available with it. Diversification is of three types - concentric, horizontal, conglomerate.
Branding of products is an important function of product management. A brand represents
consumers' perceptions and feelings of the product and its performance. It is the firm's
promise to the consumer in respect of features, benefits, services and experiences a product
will deliver to them. The positive differential effect that knowing a brand name has on
consumer response to a product or service is called as brand equity. Several options for brand
development are line extension, brand extension, multi-brands, new brands and co-branding..
Finally, products need packaging and labelling for protection, storage, delivery, identification
and information conveyance. Packaging comprises primary package, secondary package and
shipping package. Labels are a part of packaging and they contain brand names, product
name and information as also statutorily required information. Packages and labels are
important marketing tools.
35.7 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS
A 1. Out of the items mentioned below is not a physical product.
(a) Pilgrimage tour to Badrinath. (b) Dosa and chapatti
(c) Clothes (d) Drinking water
2. Match the items from column A to column B
A
(a) Single sale focus
(b) Half nest
(c) Young bachelor
(d) Empty nest B
(i) Per capita high income
(ii) Social security service
(iii) Consumer durables
(iv) Customer retention focus
B 1. In a term deposit, product core feature is
2. Match the items from column A to column B
A
(i) External Commercial Borrowing availed by your bank's customer
(ii) Writing paper bought by your bank
(iii) Petrol bought for your car
(iv) Compact Disks (CDs)
B
(a) Consumer Product
(b) Industrial Product
(c) Non-durable Goods
(d) Material Supplies
3. A product has a life cycle comprising (number of) stages.
4. Match the items from column A to column B
A
(i) Low Sales, Marginal Profit
(ii) Fast Growth, Rising Profits
(iii) Failing sales, Low margins
(a) Maturity
(b) Decline
(c) growth
C 1. Product modification includes -----------, --------------- and -------------- improvements.
394
2. Production elimination is done due to (give any one reason)
3. There are types of diversification.
4. Consumers buy brands and brands generate----- for the firm.
5. The positive differential effect that knowing a brand name has on consumer response is
called ------------.
6. Bank passbook or fixed deposit receipt may be treated as-------------packaging.
35.8 ANSWERS TO 'CHECK YOUR PROGRESS'
A. 1. (i); 2. (i)-(d), (ii)-(c), (iii)-(a), (iv)-(b).
B. 1. interest income; 2. (i)-(b), (ii)-(d), (iii)-(a), (iv)-(c); 3. Four; 4. (i)-(a), (ii)-(c),
(iii)-(b).
C. 1. quality, feature & style; 2. high carrying cost; 3. Three (3); 4. income; 5. brand
equity; 6. primary.
35.9 KEYWORDS
Customer Relationship Management, Family Life Cycle, Goods-services Mix, Product
Personality, Customer Value Hierarchy, Product Categories, Product Mix, Product Lines,
Product Items, Product Life Cycle, Product Modification, Product Elimination,
Diversification, Brand, Brand Equity, Packaging, Label.
UNIT
36PRICING
STRUCTURE
36.0 Objectives
36.1 Introduction
36.2 Importance of Pricing
36.3 Objectives of Pricing
36.4 Factors Influencing Pricing
36.5 Pricing Methods
36.6 Pricing Strategies
36.7 Bank Pricing
36.7.1 Case Studies
36.8 Let Us Sum Up
36.9 Check Your Progress
36.10 Answers to 'Check Your Progress'
36.11 Keywords
396
36.0 OBJECTIVES
In this unit, we will try to know and understand:
• Importance of pricing
• Objectives of pricing
• Factors influencing price
• Methods for determining price -
• Pricing strategies with special reference to banking products
36.1 INTRODUCTION
Price is the second major element of marketing mix. Price is the only one that generates
revenue, while other elements incur cost. We have seen that marketing involves an exchange
of transaction. One side of the exchange is the product or offering and the other is price.
Other three elements, namely the product development, promotion, and distribution create
value; in price, some of this value is captured to enable the businesses to earn profit. Thus,
price is a vital element of the marketing mix. The impact price has on the success of a product
makes its determination very important for the firms. Several factors influence price and
hence, its determination is a complex process. It is, therefore, crucial for firms to understand
the dynamics of pricing in the marketing mix and adopt appropriate pricing strategies to
derive the optimum benefit out of their offerings.
36.2 IMPORTANCE OF PRICING
In the simplest words, price is the amount of money charged for a product or service. All
business entities set a price for their products. Prices exist in different forms for products of
different nature. We find price for goods bought, hire charges for goods taken on hire, tuition
fee for education, medical fee for physician, fare for a journey by rail/bus/aeroplane,
premium for insurance cover, commission for funds remittances, interest for loan, rent for
house, and so on. In a broader sense, price is the sum value of all the values that consumers
exchange for the benefits of having or using the product or service. From the consumer's
viewpoint, price is what he agrees to pay for a product which should be up to his expectation
and give satisfaction. From the seller's view point, price should be such that it not only
recovers the cost but also generates some expected income with repeat orders.
In a free market, the process of demand and supply determines prices. Under monopoly
conditions, the seller may adopt the system of fixed price. With the use of different marketing
strategies and advent of Internet, the practice of dynamic pricing is adopted, where the buyer
bids his offer price, and seller decides on accepting any of the offers, though at varying
prices. The variable price is also offered for different geographical markets or different types
of customers. Even for the public offer of shares, the companies give a band of prices and
subscribers bid. On board the flight, you may be surprised to find that the passenger seated
next to you has paid different price for the ticket.
Price serves, at least, two purposes for the consumers:
(a) It helps buyers to allocate their purchasing power among various products to meet
their needs and wants.
(b) It gives information to consumers about the quality or value of the product,
particularly so in case of new products and intangible products.
Pricing is significant for firms as it determines the revenues and the profits generated by the
firms. It also affects the level of funds available for other elements of marketing mix.
Mistakes in pricing affect the profit, growth and future of the firm, and hence it is a very risky
area.
397
It is more difficult to determine the prices for service products. In banking industry, the prices
were earlier regulated by Reserve Bank of India and banks were having very little autonomy
for determining prices of some services. Now, prices for most of the banking products are
more or less determined by market forces.
36.3 OBJECTIVES OF PRICING
There are several objectives, which firms have in pricing. These would normally be
determined by or emanate from the corporate and marketing objectives of the firm. A firm
normally will have certain short-term and certain long-term objectives, of these, some will be
primary objectives and some secondary.
The objectives generally pursued by firms in setting prices of their products can be broadly
summarised in the following seven objectives:
(a) Profit: All commercial activities aim at earning profits. Profits accumulate to build the
stakeholders' net worth and give strength to the business. One of the major objectives of the
firms (except non¬ profit firms) is profit. Profitability is an area of concern for banks these
days. With intense competition, banks are finding their net interest margins and operating
profits under pressure.
Pricing of both fund-based and non-fund-based products has, therefore, become crucial,
especially, as banks have now new types of costs (for example, cost of risk-based capital
requirements and higher prudential provisioning) to be reckoned with. There is a shift in
orientation. Earlier the focus was on deposit growth but now branches are given profit targets.
(b) Survival: Firms facing intense competition find that they need to adjust prices for
increasing the sales volume to levels that will help recover the costs and avoid losses. With
the interest rate war in the banking industry, the margins are thinning down day by day. The
banks have to strategically price their asset products and non-interest products to generate
sufficient income and at the same time, the pricing of liability products should be cost
effective.
(c) Market share: Businesses, these days are not merely pursuing an increase in business
in absolute terms, but are keen in their relative positions as reflected by criteria like market
share. In the competitive era, marketing is more of warfare and firms aim to occupy as large a
territory as they can. Maintaining or increasing the market share is an important objective,
especially for the major players. For this, the pricing strategy plays an important role. Banks
have not only to earn profits
but also to improve business so pricing at acceptable levels would bring volumes.
(d) Cash flow: Price results in revenue and hence cash flows. Any adjustment to cash
inflows is possible through a suitable modification in price, and it is an important objective
for firms either when cash inflows assume particularly greater significance for meeting some
larger cash outlays or when faced with cash crunch. In banking industry, the product pricing
should aim at reducing the
gap between maturing its assets and liabilities in a particular time bucket.
(e) Status quo: Firms may seek to stabilise demand and sales of their products by setting
suitable price levels. This could be the objective for the market leaders in respect of the
products in the maturity
stage of the life cycle. Some of the products like bank guarantee and letters of credit could be
considered at the maturity stage of their life cycle, are to certain extent priced by banks with
an objective to have a stable demand for such products, and for earning a desired level of
revenue from these.
(f) Product quality: Improvement in product quality requires expenditure on research and
development, which is recovered through pricing, also establishes a high quality image.
Firms, which are market leaders, need to be continuously engaged in enhancement of their
offerings to the market. Banks also make huge investments in research and development and
launching of new products. Besides, with information technology becoming the driver of
banking operations, the modern day banks are
398
required to make huge investments in technology acquisition and upgradation and training its
staff. Banks need to generate adequate profits to take care of their ongoing investment
requirements, (g) Communicating image: Price often communicates an image of the value
and quality of a product. In their communications, firms often use the information on pricing,
to create an image of the value of the product in the minds of the buyers. This is one of the
main objectives for new firms or in case of new products introduced by existing firms.
Typically, foreign banks are seen to be pricing their products in a manner that there is an
exclusivity perception. Similar trend has been seen in case of the new generation private
sector banks. This is more evident in the pricing of liability products, the fixed deposit
interest rate by a Citibank or a Standard Chartered Bank are seen to be lower than that of
others. Similarly, in case of charges for sundry items, like chequebooks, cheque returns,
duplicate statements, balance inquiry, etc., reflect higher levels for such banks.
Generally, firms will pursue more than one of the abovementioned objectives. Within the
broad objectives described above, firms have several objectives of more specific nature in
respect of pricing. These objectives could be for either a short term or a long term. Some of
the common objectives pursued by firms are enumerated in Table 36.1 below:
TABLE 36.1 Short-term Objectives versus Long-term Objectives
Short-term Objectives Long-term Objectives
Profit maximisation
Minimum return on sales turnover
Achieving a particular sales level
Deeper penetration of the market
Keeping parity with competition
Fast turnaround or early cash recovery
Profit optimisation
Minimum return on investment
Achieving a particular market share
Entering new markets
Providing commodities/services at prices that will stimulate economic development
Stabilising prices and margins in the market
36.4 FACTORS INFLUENCING PRICING
There are various factors which influence the approach firms adopt in determining the price
of their products. These factors can be broadly categorised in two groups, namely those
internal to the firm and those external to the firm. Besides, some of these factors relate to the
economics of the activities, while others are psychological in nature. Some of the factors
relate to quantitative parameters but others are qualitative in nature. A table enumerating the
factors (not exhaustive) is given in Table 36.2.
TABLE 36.2 Factors-Internal and External Influencing Pricing
Internal Factors External Factors
• Objectives of the firm - both corporate and • Market characteristics - pertaining to
marketing. demand, customer, competition.
• Characteristics of the product. • Buyer's behaviour and bargaining power.
• Life cycle stage of the product. • Competitors' policy.
• Usage characteristics - use pattern, turnaround • Government controls and regulations.
rate - of the product.
• Price elasticity of the demand of the product. • Social considerations.
• Costs of manufacturing and marketing the product. • Bargaining power of suppliers.
• Composition of the product line of the firm. • Understanding with price cartels.
399
36.5 PRICING METHODS
Based on the three Cs as inputs (Fig. 36.1), the firms are required to determine a price for the
product. This task can be enunciated as arriving at an optimum level for the price within the
range of a price that is neither too high for generating any demand for the product, nor too
low to give any profit over the life cycle of the product. The competitors' pricing, gives an
orientation to be considered by the firm while setting its price. However, where a new
product is developed, the reference price will not be available.
Low Price
No possible
profit at this
price Floor Price Costs
Orienting Point
Competitor's
Prices and Prices
of Substitutes Ceiling Price
Customers'
Demand
Schedule High Price
No possible
demand at
this place
FIGURE 36.1 Three Cs Model for Pricing
Various price-setting methods used have one or more of these three considerations included.
By using these methods, firms can determine a range of prices, which is suitable for them
based on these considerations. Some of the more common methods are shown in the Table
36.3.
TABLE 36.3 Considerations for Setting Price
Cost-based Pricing Value-based Pricing Competition-based
Pricing
Mark-up Pricing Absorption Cost Pricing (Full Cost Pricing)
Target-return Pricing Marginal Cost Pricing
Perceived-value Pricing
Value Pricing
Going-rate Pricing
Auction-type Pricing
Group Pricing
(a) Mark-up pricing: The price is determined by adding a standard mark up on costs
(including both variable costs and contribution for fixed costs). The quantum of mark up
varies for different types of products; it varies between a very wide range say, from a low of
even say 10 per cent to as high as 1000 times the costs. The prices of loan products in
banking industry today vary over a wide range, being as low as a few basis points above or
even below call market rates for the loans to top corporate borrowers at one end and as high
as 30 per cent for withdrawals on credit card line to individuals at the other end. The
difference in costs (including cost of funds, risk premium, capital charge, operational costs,
statutory costs, marketing expenses and distribution expenses) of these products is much
narrower. Thus, the mark up in the latter case is much higher. On seasonal items, speciality
goods or goods involving high research and development costs have a high mark up.
(b) Absorption cost pricing: The price is arrived at by adding the required margin for
profit to the total costs of the unit. It ensures profit as long as the production is fully sold at
the determined price. It ignores the demand factor and the underlying calculations would go
wrong if the sales and production do not take place at the assumed levels. Due to variation in
costs in comparison to the standard costs, the desired profit will not result. Banks also price
some of their products on cost plus-basis.
(c) Target-return pricing: Often firms base their price on the required rate of return on
their investment. Under this method, the price is fixed on a certain level of sales as the basis.
If the sales do not reach the assumed level, then the realised profit or return will be less than
the targeted level. In fact if the sales were lower than the break-even point, there would be a
loss. Thus, the firms need to consider different prices and assess their impact on the sales
volume and profits.
400
(d) Marginal cost pricing: Under this method, the direct variable costs are fully realised
while only a portion of the fixed costs may be realised. In this way, some flexibility for
determining different prices depending on the situation is available, by recovering a varying
amount towards fixed costs.
It takes into account the demand aspect too to some extent. It is, therefore, useful for
competitive situations. Banks often use this concept in pricing their short-term loans to the
top blue corporates, when they have liquid surplus and offer the loans at a very low interest,
which just covers their cost of funds. This could be useful in case of new services. This
strategy is based on certain assumptions about the costs and revenue behaviour that may
undergo change over a period of time, which can turn out to be incorrect. It does not take into
account the classification of semi-fixed and semi- variable costs. This method is useful only
in the short run.
(e) Perceived value pricing: Firms base the price on the buyers' perception of value. For
this purpose, the non-price variables in the marketing mix are used to build up the perceived
value in the buyers' minds. Price captures this value. Costs are not used to determine price
under this method, but they are only used to verify whether adequate profit will be earned at
the chosen price level. It is important to determine correctly the markets' perception of the
offer's value, to avoid either overpricing of the product leading to lower sales or under pricing
it leading to lower realisation. Certain banks fix
up higher minimum balance for savings account, pay a lower rate of interest on fixed
deposits, which is based on the consideration that having accounts with such banks has
greater value in terms of convenience and experience of banking and hence the customers
will be willing to pay a premium for it
Potential price Product Surround Benefits Premium for
Value
surround
benefits based
Commodity Price Product Core Benefits Price for Core Benefits
price for
Cost
TotalPerceived Benefits
FIGURE 36.2 Perceived Value-based Pricing
(f) Value pricing: Certain firms set a price under this method by offering a product (with high
value) to buyers at a low price. Thus, the customers are offered the product at a price that
offers them value. The perceived value of the offer is higher than the price, giving a feeling to
buyers that of realising full value of their money. This tactics is usually employed by banks in
their offerings to credit cardholders for transfer of the outstanding under the credit card line to
personal loans. The interest on personal loans could be priced around 13 per cent p.a. as
against around 30 per cent p.a. interest on credit card drawings. The consumers thus compare
the interest rate on personal loans to that paid under credit card and see a significant value in
the offering.
(g) Going-rate pricing: Often, the firms base their prices primarily on the market price. In
case of certain products, the prices charged by different sellers are similar, and the leading
sellers initiate the changes in the price with others following them. The differential between
the prices of various sellers usually is kept unchanged. The going price reflects the collective
perception of the market, and provides an easy solution in the circumstances where other
parameters are difficult to ascertain. This is typically the situation in case of the interest rates
paid on fixed deposits or interest rates charged on the housing loans by various banks. Both
of these products have almost become
401
commoditised and the prices of various banks are within a narrow range. Besides, the prices
on these products are well publicised and hence known to the market clearly.
(h) Auction-type pricing: Another competition-based pricing method is auction type pricing.
This method is one of the oldest and has gained more popularity with the advent of Internet.
There are three types of auction pricing systems.
(i) English auctions: The situation where there is one seller and many buyers, say in case of
antiques, real estate, used equipment. The buyers bid their offer price for the item put up on
sale and the prices go on increasing, till the top price is reached. The seller may often set a
minimum (floor) price.
(ii) Dutch auctions: This system is followed in two situations - one seller, many buyers; and
many sellers, one buyer. In the first situation, the seller announces the high price for the
product and then slowly goes on reducing the price till a bidder accepts it. In the second
situation, the buyer calls for bids from the sellers for a particular item and accepts the bid at
the lowest price with other things being similar.
(iii) Sealed-bid auctions: In such a system, each seller is permitted to bid only once and they
are not aware of the bid submitted by other sellers. Hence, the sellers tend to keep their bids
low enough so as not to lose the contract. On the other hand, the seller's own costs serve as
the floor in order not to make loss on the deal. Several well performing PSUs and Goverment.
departments have adopted this practice of calling for bids from banks for loans or bank
guarantees, quoting their interest rates or commission charges respectively. Due to the fierce
competition among banks, even the top public sector banks submit their bids, and the PSUs
are able to get rock bottom prices.
(i) Group pricing: This is a new development in pricing methods made feasible by the
Internet. The buyers can join a group to purchase a product at a lower price, which is
available for a specific volume purchase. Web sites exist, which facilitate transactions based
on this method. Consumers can see on the web site the current price for the product. They can
also know the likely price in case of further orders, being added to the pool. The banks offer
vehicle loans at concessional rate to the employees of a company where recoveries are made
directly by the company.
Having determined a suitable price range, there are a few other factors, which the firms need
to consider before setting a final price. There are various other entities, apart from the buyers,
who are affected by changes in price. The impact of price changes on them, namely, dealers,
distributors and sales force needs consideration. Similarly, the likely reactions or responses of
the competitors, the Government and the suppliers, need to be thought of while determining
the price. The regulatory and legislative stipulations regarding the pricing methods and price
levels need observance. Still now, to some extent, banks have to observe the regulations of
Reserve Bank of India in respect of interest rates on advances and deposits. Besides, the
guidelines of Indian Banks' Association, Banking Codes and Standards Board of India for
service charges and of Foreign Exchange Dealers' Association of India in respect of foreign
exchange transaction have been the bases of several service charges of the banks, particularly
public sector banks.
36.6 PRICING STRATEGIES
While pricing methods help the firms in fixing a price for a product, they are required to
review and decide the price for specific situations based on several other aspects, which
cannot be fully integrated into the price set under pricing methods. Firms adopt several
strategies to arrive at a pricing structure taking into account such other variables. These are:
• Geographical pricing • Price discounts and allowances
402
Psychological pricing Promotional pricing
Discriminatory pricing Product-mix pricing
Market-skimming pricing Market-penetration pricing
(a) Geographical Pricing
This involves deciding upon the prices for customers in different locations, regions or
countries. It concerns issues like the incidence of higher transportation cost in respect of
customer at a distant location, whether it should be passed on to the customer or absorbed by
the firm as an incentive to the customer. Banks have different pricing for different
geographical areas like Metro, urban, semi-urban and rural areas like consumer goods
companies offer varied prices for products like biscuits, paper, petroleum products,
medicines, etc.
(b) Price Discounts and Allowances
Discounts and allowances' on list price is adopted for various occasions like early payments,
volume purchases and off-season buying, etc. The discounts and allowances can be of various
types:
(i) Cash discount: For payment of instalments promptly banks offer concession in rate,
(ii) Quantity discount: For large volume purchases - there are different rate of interests for
bulk depositors. Even State Bank of India has come out with bid pricing for bulk deposits of
Rs. 50 crore and above,
(iii) Functional discount: Discounts (trade discounts) by producers to trade channel members
for performing certain functions. Like commission to recovery agents, deposit collectors, etc.
(iv) Seasonal discount: Discounts given during off-season or festival offer- waiver of
processing fee for loans during festival season,
(v) Allowances: Extra payment at the time of promotions for participation. Dealers get
promotional allowances for participating in advertising campaigns. Trade-in allowances are
given for turning in an old item, (vi) As regards banking, it is seen that banks adopt discounts
and allowances to attract customers. It is common to see the discount and allowance waived
for processing cost, in case of home loans and retail loans. Some of the banks also allow fee
waiver for high net worth individuals in credit card and other card offerings.
(c) Psychological Pricing
To many consumers, price reflects the quality of the product; they consider higher priced
products to be of better quality. Particularly in the absence of any other information about
quality, the price acts as a signal of quality. Buyers often base their information about the
current prices and past prices tend to form a reference price of the products mentally. By
setting a price in a particular range, sellers can create an impression about the product
belonging to a particular class. Often one finds different sections for premium price goods
and economy price goods signalling that the former are of a higher quality. Another practice
under psychological pricing is that of price set at an odd number rather than a round figure, as
buyers tend to see such prices at the lower level.
(d) Promotional Pricing
For stimulating early purchases, several techniques are used by firms. These techniques are
likely to be copied by the competitors, thus reducing their effectiveness. Some of the
techniques are:
(i) Loss-leader pricing: Supermarkets often reduce the price on well-known brands, with a
view to increasing the traffic at the store. They expect to cover the loss on the sales of these
items from the additional sales of other items to these buyers.
(ii) Special-event pricing: In certain seasons, like a festival, school reopening, etc., special
prices are
403
offered by sellers. Around Diwali, most consumer durable goods carry some discount or a
free gift,
(iii) Cash rebates: These are offered for a limited period for purchases made during the
period, especially with a view to clear the inventory. Usually leather footwear sellers have
stock clearance sale campaigns during monsoon,
(iv) Low-interest financing: Sellers offer low-interest (even no interest) financing for a short-
term during a certain period, in lieu of a discount or reduction in list price. Automobile sellers
conduct sale campaigns with the payment facility over twelve to thirty six months at low
interest,
(v) Longer payment terms: When the buyers find the monthly repayment liability more
relevant than the interest, sellers offer a longer period for payment. Housing loans for a term
of fifteen years and even twenty years, carrying higher rates of interest, are offered by some
banks,
(vi) Warranties and service contracts: Low-cost or free warranty or service contract is added
to the offer during a particular period for promoting sales. Usually producers of automobile,
refrigerator, etc., offer free service contracts for two years at no extra cost,
(vii) Psychological discounting: It involves setting an artificially high price and offering a
substantial discount on it. A technique often resorted to by various sellers, and buyers today
are suspicious of the original prices displayed for a product during sale offer, (viii)
Promotional pricing is adopted by banks in the new products brought out by them. For
example,
it is seen that introduction of credit cards is combined with fee waiver, additional card use
points, etc.
(e) Discriminatory Pricing
When different prices are charged to different buyers, it is discriminatory pricing. There could
be different types of price discrimination. These are as follows:
(i) First degree: A different price to each customer, depending upon their intensity of demand.
In case of made to order products, say some component for equipment, when required
urgently may be priced higher than that for normal delivery period. Laundry services often
charge more for urgent delivery for same day service for washing clothes.
(ii) Second degree: A lower price for buyers of a larger volume. For most goods, especially
commodity goods, the prices for bulk quantity is lower. Hotels offer special rates to the
corporate sector, who assure certain minimum room nights in a year, or to guests who stay for
a few months.
(iii) Third degree: Different prices for different classes of buyers. The classes could be based
on various factors such as:
- customer groups (students, senior citizens) (most banks offer additional interest on
deposits
to senior citizens);
- product form (different versions of product) (Maruti has two different versions of its
Alto VX
and LX at different prices);
- image pricing (same product sold with different image and name);
- channel (restaurant, fast food stall, vending machine) (in certain countries it is a
common
practice for cafeterias to charge more for sit-in eating than for carry packs, some banks in
India have introduced charges for cash transactions effected through teller at branch with no
charge for those conducted at ATMs);
- location (different sections of an auditorium);
- time (rates for STD calls at different time of the day).
This can be adopted in those situations when market segments with different demand
intensities exist, resale of lower-priced products at higher price should not be possible and
underselling by competitors should not be possible. It is also necessary to examine the legal
provisions in respect of discriminatory pricing.
404
Discriminatory pricing is seen in the banks offering finer rates of interest for customers with
better risk rating and the corporate sector who have a relationship with the banks. Another
discriminatory pricing practiced by banks is the additional rate of interest offered to bulk
deposits as also senior citizens. The former is a business decision while the latter adds value
to the bank on account of social responsibility.
(f) Product Mix Pricing
In case of, products which are a part of product mix, the pricing becomes more complex. This
involves developing a set of prices for optimising the profit for the entire mix.
(i) Product line pricing: Developing a product line with distinct pricing steps,
(ii) Optional feature pricing: Optional features offered at additional cost, keeping the basic
product to bare minimum at the base price,
(iii) Captive-product pricing: For products requiring captive or ancillary products, the latter
could be priced with high mark up and the main product could be priced low.
(iv) Two-part pricing: The price is split into a fixed component and a variable component
linked to the usage,
(v) By-product pricing: By-products obtained in production of other products can be priced at
the value they have for consumers, which helps in charging a lower price on the main
product,
(vi) Product-bundling pricing: Seller may bundle products and features and offer them
together only as a bundle. Alternatively, while offering individual products seller may also
offer a package including all these at lower cost.
(g) Market-skimming Pricing
This is a strategy particularly adopted for new products. In this system, the product is initially
priced higher and over a period of time it is reduced to attract more buyers, with a view to
"skimming" the revenues layer by layer from the market. This requires the product quality
and image to be of the required level, the buyers attracted at the high price, feasible
economics at low scale of production and barriers to the entry of other competitors. The
amount of product sold is less affected by its price when the product is new than it will be at a
later stage when competition has more influence. It allows attracting less price sensitive
customers in the initial stage and the more price sensitive ones at the later stage. It helps in
testing the demand and it is safer to begin with a higher price and then lower it rather than the
other way round. The mobile telephone services are typical example of this strategy. Initially,
the charges for mobile services (and of course, the handsets too) were very high and it catered
only to the higher strata of the society and businesses. (Mobiles were status symbols)
Gradually, as the price of mobile calls reduced, its usage expanded rapidly. And with handsets
becoming very much affordable, it is now a convenience (and for some, a business necessity)
product. Now, with its pricing much closer to landline services with the added convenience, it
is driving out the latter. In case of credit cards, it has been observed that banks have
introduced credit card variants with lower entry fees and annual fees in the past few years so
as to widen the base.
(h) Market-penetration Pricing
Another strategy for new products is of setting the price low initially in order to penetrate the
market quickly and deeply attracting a large market share. High volumes give benefit of
lower costs, allowing further reduction in price. This strategy is useful when the quantity of
the product sold is highly sensitive to its price, even in the introductory stage, the economies
of scale for production and distribution are quite substantial, and there is no group of
customers who will be willing to pay a premium to obtain the product early. Some banks used
this strategy at the time of introduction of money market instruments, offering higher interest
rates so as to attract higher market share and also expecting to retain the first
405
customers even after others increased their rates, as long as they were competitive. For banks,
typically most products are volume driven and they soon get commoditised, except for some
highly specialised products like in case of private banking and typical structured deals.
Hence, banks usually find market-penetration pricing more suitable.
36.7 BANK PRICING
There are two major costs, which have to be considered while pricing bank products:
(A) Interest cost (B) Servicing cost
Normally interest cost constitutes 67 per cent of the price and service cost is around 33 per
cent in any bank product. Banks now price each of their services. The services, which are
associated with the product, are also priced now. Traditionally, banks have been adopting
pricing (ROI) on the basis of values of loan or based on the development of priorities. But
these days, the ROI offered on the deposits and charged on the loans and advances is (a) cost
of fund based and (b) market related. Banks have also
TABLE 36.4 Charges Banks Charge for Some of the Services
For not maintaining minimum quarterly average balance in Savings Bank a/c Rs. 300/-
per quarter
SB chequebook Rs. 3/- per leaf in excess of 20 leaves in a year
Multi-city chequebook Quarterly average balance Rs. 50,000/- Per cheque leaf 5/-,
penalty 500/-transaction charges Rs. 100/- per Rs. 50,000/-
Inter-city charges 0.35% Above 20,000/- with a minimum of Rs. 50/-
Charges for not maintaining minimum quarterly average balance in CA For individuals
750/- per quarter for others Rs. 1350/- per quarter
A/c closure within a year SB 220/-, firm 500/-
Transactions Rs. 20/- per transaction beyond 60 transactions a year
Standing Instructions Registration Rs. 110/-, Rs. 25/- per transac¬tion for other than branch
accounts
Cash handling CA, CC above Rs. 10,000/- to Rs. 50,000/-Rs. 10/-, Rs. 25/- and Rs. 50/-
Inoperative account where balance is below minimum required Rs. 75/- per year
Old entries beyond 12 months Rs. 150/- per entry
Attestation of photo Rs. 100/-
Signature verification Rs. 50/-
DD issue charges Rs. 30/- up to Rs. 10,000/-, 0.35% above Rs. 10,000/-
Revalidation of DD Rs. 100/-
Issue of Duplicate DDRs. 110/-
406
started levying a fee for all the services. In the past, these fees were at times included in the
rate of interest. In the previous paragraph, we have indicated pricing strategies adopted by the
banks. It can be inferred, therefore, that strategy of the banks and competition is more
apparent in retail products. Banks have also started using competitive pricing in their
traditional business. Table 36.4 gives certain examples of charges banks charge for some of
the services.
Other factors which impact in bank pricing:
1. Risk and return: The banks are required to assess their risk in credit (loans and
advances), operations and market exposure. Banks have developed (and are now fine tuning)
the internal mechanism to capture these risks and relate to their products. Now banks would
be in a position to quantify the revenue and cost associated with each product line. These risk
factors play an important role in price determination.
2. Monetary policy: Based upon the Govt. priorities, the RBI announces monetary policy
annually and reviews the same every quarter. In this policy, if RBI changes CRR, SLR, Repo
rate, Reverse repo rate, etc., it affects the pricing decision of the bank. The Government may
also set.national priorities for boosting growth of a specific sector and banks may be directed
to provide soft loans. Banks would be left with no other alternative but to alter the prices of
those products.
3. Capital adequacy: The assets of the banks (investments, loans and advances) are
assigned different risk weights based upon their risk. Based upon these risk weights ranging
from 0 per cent on loan on own deposit to 150 per cent on exposure to commercial real estate,
banks have to provide for the capital based upon the aggregate value of their risk-weighted
assets. Hence, the higher the risk weight the higher is the capital required, so the higher is the
product price.
4. Cost-benefit analysis: Banks conduct cost benefit analysis for a customer/product for
differential pricing. This analysis helps them to price the product based upon the margin and
other benefits it gets from that customer/product.
36.7.1 Case Studies
Case 1 The Case of P&G's New Tide Bar
P&G's New Tide Raises Detergent Bar for HLL
The battle just got bigger in the detergents' market. Hindustan Lever (HLL) and Proctor &
Gamble (P&G) are already locked in a no-holds-barred contest in the detergent powder
market, and P&G's entry in detergent bars may mean some sleepless nights for HLL
managers. P&G has not offered the product at a discount though, with the New Tide Bar
being launched at prices similar to that of Rin Supreme.
Will P&G's entry set-off another price war? At the moment, P&G seems to be testing the
waters, analysts said. Its success in the initial months will determine if a price reduction will
happen. HLL's reaction to the launch is also awaited.
The Rs. 5,000 crore detergents' market is broadly divided into bars, which make up 57 per
cent of the market, and powder, which accounts for the rest. HLL, with brands like Rin Shakti
and Rin Supreme, holds a major share in this market. It has a 38 per cent share by value of
the total detergents' market and about 41 per cent of the detergent bar market. Some of the
other major players in the bar segment are Nirma and Henkel.
Rin Supreme's market share is 14 per cent while that of Rin Shakti is 6.7 per cent. Rin is one
of the mega brands of HLL, with sales in excess of $100 m or Rs. 450 crore, but this includes
powder sales too. P&G is targeting the segment which includes Rin Supreme with its new
product. P&G's earlier launch in this segment, Ariel bar, did not do well and the company will
discontinue the product.
407
"People will try out P&G's new product once, but one has to give time to see if the product is
a success," said an analyst. Tide has managed to build an association with whiteness and the
product will try and capitalise on that.
P&G's entry into detergent reinforces the belief that it is really serious about its Indian
operations, according to analysts. P&G has not launched the product with a discount to the
competing product though. A 125 gm bar is priced at Rs. 8.5 while a 200 gm bar has been
priced at Rs. 13. P&G believes this price point to be appropriate. "Our research shows that
the current price of Tide Bar is what the consumer will find affordable," said Chester Twigg,
Director - sales and marketing, P&G, India.
Another view is that P&G will wait and watch for sometime before making any move on the
price front, instead of launching with a discount. Launching a brand at a discount could also
give a wrong impression to consumers about quality, said an analyst. Whatever be the reason,
one will have to wait for HLL's reaction.
(Press report appearing in The Economic Times, Mumbai edition, issue dated 19 November,
2004.)
Please read the press report appearing above. If you were the Chief Marketing Officer of
HLL, what would you do in response to this development? What pricing strategy is P&G
having in mind at this stage? Do you concur with P&G's approach of not offering a discount
at the time of the launch? Do you agree that a lower price would give a wrong impression to
consumers about the quality?
Do you think that similar scenario applies in banking sector, say to the pricing of housing
loans? As a marketing student, how do you see this press report? In which areas does it
provide learning points?
Case 2 The Case of Home Loan - Competition and Best Rate on Home Loan
There are number of players in the home loan markets. PSU giants like SBI and PNB, Private
bank like ICICI Bank and specialised institutions like HDFC are in the fray. In addition there
are number of banks and private institutions like Dewan Housing Catering to the needs of
prospective borrowers.
Each lender is trying to enhance his share in the loan market. While these lenders keep
publishing their interest rates for various loan products, there is more to the published interest
rate than meets the eve. Two loan applicants to the same bank may get a different rate. There
is no such thing as a "standard rate" for a particular bank. The rate published by banks is a
"rack rate" on which significant discounts are usually available.
Surinder, a prospective home buyer wants to get best rate on home loan. As competitive offer
depends upon certain factors, he should present himself and convince lender on following
counts.
(a) Profile: The greater the bank's interest in Surinder's profile, the higher the chances of
them offering
a discount to him.
(b) Bargaining power: Surinder should talk to multiple banks. In general, loan applicants
who talk to
three or more banks - are effectively lining up alternatives. Softly playing one bank against
another
often helps, but the key is to not to carry too far. After all, the threat of losing business to a
competitor
must look realistic and credible to the bank for it to lower its rate.
So, the key question for Surinder now is: How he should go about getting the best rate:
1. Surinder should enquire at all possible banks offering the kind of loan he is looking
for.
2. When the bank approaches Surinder, he should provide documents on proof of
income such as
income tax returns, bank statements, form 16 and salary slip.
3. It is likely that the rate offered, after his documents are looked at by the bank would
often be lower
than what he was offered at the first meeting. So, he should not take any decision before the
bank
reverts to him after examining his income document.
408
4. Surinder should shortlist at least two banks (who offer the best possible rates and
other terms relevant to him).
5. Surinder should scrutinise the draft loan agreement, to ensure that there are no hidden
clauses, that could affect him adversely.
After weighing the comparable annualised percentage rate of two short listed banks, he
should select the bank which is offering the lowest rate.
36.8 LET US SUM UP
Price, the amount of money charged for a product or service, is the only revenue generating
element, of the marketing mix. Initially, the prices were settled by negotiation between the
buyers and sellers, which was followed by the system of fixed price. Internet has again
brought dynamic pricing into active zone. Price helps consumers to allocate their purchasing
power and gives them information about the product quality. For firms, it affects profits
hence is an important and risky area. Intense competition creates a tremendous pressure for a
downward revision of prices.
Pricing has several objectives: profit optimisation, survival of the firm, increasing or
maintaining the market share, getting suitable cash inflows, stabilisation of demand supply
balance, product quality maintenance and communicating the image of the product value and
quality. Some of the objectives are of short-term nature and others of long-term nature.
Pricing is influenced by several internal and external factors. These factors are not constant
and hence price needs reviewing periodically. Three principal inputs affecting the pricing
decisions are: customers' demand schedule (setting a ceiling), cost functions (fixing a floor),
and competitors' prices (providing the orientation). Government regulations also influence
price. Various pricing methods include one or more of these three Cs. Thus, there are three
main types of pricing methods: cost-based, value-based and competition-based. Different
methods have suitability under different conditions. In case of banks the regulations of RBI,
Govt. priorities, capital adequacy requirement, guidelines of ISA and FEDAI have some
bearing on pricing the products.
Firms can arrive at a range of feasible prices by using pricing methods. However, for fixing
the final price, several other factors need consideration. For this purpose, several pricing
strategies are adopted to determine specific price under a given situation. These strategies
take into account the geographical, customer segment, competition conditions, buyers'
perception, stage of product life cycle and product characteristics into account.
36.9 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS
1. Please choose the correct alternatives for each of the following statements:
(a) Out of the following, is not an objective of pricing.
(i) Profit
(ii) Stabilising demand and sales of the product
(iii) Improvement in product quality
(iv) Expansion of business
(b) Of the following pricing methods, _ . is not based on competitors pricing.
(ii) Sealed bid auction
(iv) Group pricing
is not ideal for new products.
(ii) Discriminatory pricing
(iv) Promotional Pricing
(i) English auction
(iii) Going-rate pricing
(c) Of the following pricing strategies,
(i) Market-skimming
(iii) Market-penetration
409
2. Please state for each of the following statements whether it is True or False.
(a) Price for any product is a constant.
(b) One of the objectives of pricing is getting cash inflows at the required time.
(c) Perceived value pricing takes the buyers' perception into account.
36.10 ANSWERS TO 'CHECK YOUR PROGRESS'
1. (a)-(iv), (b)-(iv), (c)-(ii); 2. (a) False, (b) True, (c) True.
36.11 KEYWORDS
Dynamic Pricing, Pricing Methods, Cost-based Pricing, Value-based Pricing, Competition-
based Pricing, Perceived Value Pricing, Value Pricing, Group Pricing, Pricing Strategies,
Discounts, Allowances, Psychological Pricing, Promotional Pricing, Loss-leader Pricing,
Cash-rebates, Discriminatory Pricing, Market-skimming Pricing, Market-penetration Pricing,
Cost-benefit Analysis, Risk Weighted Assets.
DISTRIBUTION
STRUCTURE
37.0 Objectives
37.1 Introduction
37.2 Distribution Channel
37.2.1 Functions of Distribution Channel
37.2.2 Channel Types
37.2.3 Factors Influencing Channel Selection
37.2.4 Channel Management
37.3 Channels for Banking Services
37.3.1 Branches
37.3.2 Other Channels
37.3.3 Intermediaries in Banking Services
37.4 Let Us Sum Up
37.5 Check Your Progress
37.6 Answers to 'Check Your Progress'
37.7 Keywords
412
37.0 OBJECTIVES
In this unit, we shall seek to know and understand:
• Functions of distribution channels
• Types of distribution channels
• Distribution channels for banking services
• Intermediaries in banking services
• Physical distribution
37.1 INTRODUCTION
One of the four Ps of marketing mix is "Place" or "Distribution". In the economic terms, any
product, being capable of giving customer satisfaction needs to have "place" and "time"'
utility. This is provided by the "Distribution" function of marketing mix. All endeavours of
production will come to nought, if the products do not reach the consumers for consumption.
In the normal goods distribution process, entities other than the producers are also associated
and there is a chain between the producer and the consumer. For an effective conclusion of
marketing, the functioning of other elements in the chain is as important as that of the
producer. Hence, marketing mix decisions also include distribution strategy decisions. The
distribution function, in the case of services, differs substantially due to the special
characteristics of services. In fact, it is the distribution function, which bears the greatest
impact of these peculiarities. However, it is easier to understand the dynamics of distribution
by studying it in the context of physical goods and then study the distribution function in
respect of services.
37.2 DISTRIBUTION CHANNEL
The goods reach from the producers to consumers through a chain of entities, associated with
the process directly or indirectly. These entities form what is called as a distribution or
marketing channel. It is in the simplest manner as follows:
Marketing channels are sets of independent organisations involved in the process of making a
product or service available for use or consumption.
As one can imagine, the process of distribution involves more than one independent entity to
take care of various tasks, besides the job of selling of the product to the ultimate consumer.
Mostly producers do not handle the task of selling to the ultimate consumer on their own, but
use the services of intermediaries for the purpose. This makes the function of distribution a
little complex for the producers, in as much as, they are required to build relationships, not
only with the consumers but also with key suppliers and resellers in the firm's supply chain or
what is better termed as value delivery network. This is the network comprising firm,
suppliers, distributors and ultimately customers who work with each other to create the value
for the customer.
Distribution channels involve long-term commitments on the part of the producer to various
firms. It is, therefore, not possible to replace the channel readily and hence, it needs designing
carefully.
37.2.1 Functions of Distribution Channel
The channel members add value or utility to products and services they make available to the
consumers. Members of a distribution channel are required to perform the following
functions:
(a) Market Information: They gather intelligence and information about potential and current
customers, competitors and other forces in marketing environment and disseminate it to the
producer. The channels provide to the producer the feedback about consumer reactions and
the reactions of
413
other entities, including their competitors' actions. In fact, the dealers and distributors serve
as "the eyes and ears" of the producers.
(b) Promotion: They develop and spread persuasive communication about the offer for
stimulating the purchases. The personal selling task, especially in the case of new products,
launch or relaunch of an existing product is performed by the dealers/retailers who come in
direct contact with the customers. They also provide pre-sales and post-sales service to the
consumers.
(c) Contact: They serve the function of locating and communicating with the prospective
buyers. It is possible for some manufacturers to have their own network to reach the
customers. Most manufacturers, especially those producing mass consumption goods, find it
difficult to do so because of the large number of widely scattered consumers and the high
level of resources required. The distribution channel due to its physical proximity to
consumers helps in smooth sales process and brings together consumer and producer
efficiently.
(d) Matching: The distribution channel partners shape and fit the offer to the buyer's
needs, including alterations, grading, assembling and packaging. They also help in providing
varieties of offerings from different sources to the consumer. The consumers find it
convenient as they can buy different complementary items from the same source, rather than
shopping from different outlets. The consumers get the convenience of seeking some minor
alterations/additions made at the outlet to meet their specific requirements.
(e) Negotiation: They negotiate and settle the final price and other terms with the buyer
so that ownership and possession can be transferred. They also provide the producer, the
customers' reaction to the price.
(f) Product Information: The distribution channels not only sell the products to the
consumers, but provides them the required technical information about the products. This
enables the consumers to get the optimum results from the products.
(g) Physical Distribution: The channels perform an important role in physical
distribution. They transport and store the goods for reaching ultimately to the consumer.
(h) Financing: They acquire and use funds for financing the channel operations. The
intermediaries provide the deposit or buy the goods in bulk from the producer on cash basis.
They also extend credit to the retailer.
(i) Risk Taking: They assume the risk of carrying out the channel tasks.
37.2.2 Channel Types
The above mentioned functions need to be performed for completing the marketing
transaction between the producer and the consumer. These functions involve certain costs.
Depending on whether any or all of these functions are performed by the producer, its costs
will be higher. Where these are performed by other intermediaries, they have to add their
costs for the same to the producer's cost of goods or services. The channel, which gives the
least total cost and adds greatest value for the consumer will be most suitable.
A distribution channel comprises several channel levels, which is a layer of marketing
intermediaries that performs some work in bringing the product ownership and possession to
the final buyer.
The number of intermediary levels indicates the length of a channel. Figure 37.1 shows
several channels for consumer goods.
Channel 1 shown in Figure 37.1 has no intermediary level and is called as zero-level channel.
It is also called as the direct marketing channel, as the producer sells the products directly to
the consumer.
Other channels shown in Figure 37.1 are indirect marketing channels of different lengths
containing one or more intermediaries.
414
Channel 1 Zero Level
Channel 2 One Level Direct Channel
Manufacturer
Indirect Channel
Manufacturer
Retailer
Channel 3 Two Level Manufacturer Wholesaler ► Retailer
Channel 4 Three Level Manufacturer Wholesaler Jobber -
Retailer
FIGURE 37.1 Consumer Distribution Channels
Channel 1 Zero Level Manufacturer
Channel 2 One Level Manufacturer
Business Distributor | ^
Manufacturer's Representatives or Sales Branch
Channel 3 Two Level Manufacturer
Manufacturer's Representatives or Sales Branch
Channel 4 Three Level Manufacturer
—» Business Distributor
FIGURE 37.2 Business Distribution Channels
In case of business distribution channels (Figure 37.2), the producers either use their own
sales force and network to sell directly to the customers or they can sell to intermediaries who
in turn sell to the customers.
37.2.3 Factors Influencing Channel Selection
Producers have to decide the types of channels for distribution of their products. The major
factors influencing this decision are discussed below:
(a) Product Characteristics
The nature of product is a major factor determining the selection of marketing channels. The
main classes of products requiring different types of channels are: (i) Perishable products:
These are food products like fruits, vegetables, milk, sweets, etc., which can be sold through
direct channel.
(ii) Consumer durables: Products like television sets, refrigerators, etc., need to be sold
through dealers and authorised showrooms, which serve the purpose of display of the
products, conveying the specialised information about the product to the prospective
customers and also offer after sales service.
415
(iii) Industrial products: Industrial products like raw materials, machine tools, computers,
etc., direct sale to the industrial users is most suitable. Sometimes, distributors are appointed
for promoting the sales.
(b) Market Characteristics
The nature of market for the product, i.e. location of market, size of market, number of
potential customers, buying habits of consumers and elasticity of demand, affects the choice
of channel. For a product with a local market, a direct channel is suitable. However, in case of
products having a regional or national market a chain of intermediaries is required for
distribution of the product. For consumer goods like soaps, soft drinks, etc., the consumers
are widespread and have different types of needs and buying habits. For such products, it is
better to have two- or three-level channel for reaching a larger number of buyers. For
industrial products, the buyers are located at few specific centres and hence covered by the
producers directly. For new products, a wider reach is possible through a longer channel. But,
in case of a new or a small producer, wholesaler or retailers may not be willing to accept the
products. In that event, direct selling or sales through a sole selling agent may be adopted.
(c) Customer Characteristics
Customers may belong to different age group, sex, income group, etc., and would have
different buying habits, preferences and needs. The customer convenience is another
important criterion for channel selection.
(d) Company Resources
Firms with strong financial resources and a capable managerial talent can select the direct
channel. If the firm is new with very little financial resources, it is preferable to have an
indirect channel with a minimum number of intermediaries.
(e) Competition
Where the competition is strong, a longer channel of two or three levels will be suitable for
increasing the sales. In case where competition is limited, a shorter channel would suit. The
method adopted by the competitor may also affect the choice of channel. One strategy is to
avoid the channel used by the competitor and instead concentrate on an alternative channel
where there is no other competition.
(f) Product Lines
Producers with several product lines and each line with several items find it more suitable to
hand over the distribution functions to other intermediaries.
37.2.4 Channel Management (Discussed in a separate chapter)
37.3 CHANNELS FOR BANKING SERVICES
Service products have distinct characteristics, hence, the distribution of service products is
complex. Banking services mainly depend upon direct distribution, i.e. through their own
branch network. With the technological revolution in banking, in addition to branches, many
more delivery channels are used by the banks to make their products reach the customers.
The fierce competition in banking has compelled the banks to come out of their shells and
reach the customers with newer distribution channels.
37.3.1 Branches
Branches are the primary distribution outlets for banking services. These are fixed in location
and the consumers are normally required to visit the branch for transacting their business.
Hence, the location
416
of branches is very important and it should be in a place convenient to the customers.
Banking is a convenience business, and for consumers availing routine day-to-day services,
the location is the principal criterion for choosing a bank. As per the survey conducted by
IBA, 46 to 65% of customers choose a bank branch for the convenient location.
A well-spread branch network covering the major business centres of the country or region,
depending on the area covered by the banking firm, is one of the fundamental requirements
for the growth of banking business. The existence of a branch outlet determines the capability
of the bank to extend various services, especially those related to remittances, collection
services, trade facilities, etc. The number of branches and location of a branch are determined
by several factors. The business policies of the bank like the niche activities, focus customer
groups, area to be covered, etc., are the basic criteria in this respect. The business potential of
various locations satisfying the requirements of business policy forms the basis of short
listing the locations for setting up the branch. As per the new branch licensing policy of the
Reserve Bank of India, the banks have to submit their projections for opening new branches/
ATMs during the next financial year and obtain the requisite licence from the RBI
accordingly.
Besides the location, the layout of the branch and its internal decor also make an impact on
the customer. The branch has to be functionally convenient for customer movement for
transacting their business; it should be physically comfortable and environmentally pleasing
so as to give a totally good experience to the customer during the branch visit. A good
aesthetic and comfortable environment also keeps the staff in a better state of mind to render
a more pleasing service. Being a service activity, the quality is judged to a great extent by the
"experience feeling" apart from the absolute service criteria. Waiting lounge, light music,
drinking water, newspaper, magazines and proper queue system make customer feel better
during the waiting time for the transaction.
Types of branches: Branches offer different types of services for different types of customers
and can be broadly classified as follows:
1. General branch: This type of branches provides their customers almost all banking
services with
big range of deposit and loan products and remittance facilities as well.
2. Speciality branch: The general branches are not well equipped with the skills required
to handle a
specialised business hence speciality branches are created to focus on the specific type of
clients,
(a) Personal banking, (b) International business, (c) Trade finance
37.3.2 Other Channels
Other than branches, banks have also adopted certain electronic and telecommunication-
based outlets.
(a) Telephone Banking and Call Centres
With the advent of telecom services and the evolution of using telecommunication facilities
for customer services and relations, banking services have also adopted this channel. This has
been possible, particularly, due to computerisation of banking operations, thus making the
basic database accessible across the organisation. Certain basic banking transactions, like
balance inquiry, requisition for a cheque book, etc., are offered through telephone banking. In
phone banking, some of the services are made available round the clock, thus giving the
"customer" the benefit of 24 x 7 service.
(b) Automated Teller Machines
These have made the banking services particularly cash related services more accessible and
convenient for the customers. They are available round the clock and hence the customer can
transact business at his convenient time. ATMs located at the branch premises facilitate self-
service by the customers, which makes the bank staff free for other high-end functions. The
customers get the satisfaction of participating in the process of service delivery. Off site
ATMs provide a value addition and enable
417
branches to tap business from a wider area. ATMs located in residential colonies to a certain
extent remove the disadvantage of longer distance from the branch premises. ATMs at the
railway stations and petrol pumps provide the convenience of delivery of the service at a
location most suitable to the customer. Further, banks forge linkages with ATM networks of
other banks to provide a wider access to their own customers over a larger area and at more
number of points. The objective is to make the basic services available to the customer 'at
hand at any point of time'.
(c) Personal Computer
Computerisation of the banking operations and the spread of personal computers (PCs),
which is now fast becoming a household good, have opened up yet another channel. Banking
transactions are now also being provided through PCs. Apart from carrying out routine
transactions on their accounts through net banking or home banking, customers can also
make remittances and request for opening of LCs. Under home banking, customer is provided
a dedicated connectivity and a limited access to the bank's database and systems to enable
them to transact certain types of business. Under net banking, the customer is provided access
through the internet, which is accessible from anywhere and is permitted to conduct certain
limited types of business.
(d) Plastic Cards
Credit cards and debit cards facilitate the banking transactions of a certain nature, to be done
outside the banking premises and at a time suitable to the customer. These serve as a means
for credit services becoming available at the merchant establishments located away from the
branches. Thus, these devices have helped in removing the restrictions arising due to
inseparability and also in enhancing the capacity of the organisation.
(e) Virtual Branches and Automated Video Banking
Banks, in certain countries, create what looks like a branch in any public place like a hotel
lobby, etc. These branches have ATMs, phones and interactive two-way video monitors and
communication systems. Customers can transact certain types of businesses through these
virtual branches.
37.3.3 Intermediaries in Banking Services
While in banking, intermediaries of the conventional types are not found, certain banks have
started availing the services of external agencies for extending some of the banking services.
These agencies may be looked upon as intermediaries because they:
• Increase the availability or convenience of a service
• Increase its use or the revenues from its use
• Help maintain existing users, increase use among existing users or attract new users
Following types of intermediaries are found working for banks:
• Direct sales agents: Certain banks avail the services of marketing agencies for selling
some of their products say housing loans, auto loans, etc. (Separate chapter on DSA/DMA
follows)
• Automobile dealers: They enter into a tie-up with a certain bank and then start selling
its auto loans.
• Merchant establishments: These establishments at their points of sale accept the credit
or debit cards of banks, thereby facilitating banking transactions to be effected at their end.
37.4 LET US SUM UP
Distribution function refers to the set of activities which make the goods reach from the
producers to the consumers. Several intermediaries, forming the distribution channel,
typically perform it. These
418
channels perform various functions such as market information, promotion and negotiation,
customer service, financing and risk-taking, apart from physical distribution of products.
The channels vary in the number of levels and the channel comprising only the producer and
the consumer is called a direct marketing channel. The selection of channels is influenced by
several factors like, the characteristics of products, markets and customers; resources of the
company; nature of competition and product lines.
The distinctive nature of services has an impact on the distribution channel for services.
Consequently, banking services have typically used the direct channel for distribution. These
characteristics have placed certain limitations on the distribution function, however, with the
advent of the use of information technology for banking, some of these limitations have been
worked around.
The principal channel for banks is the branch network. The customers are required to visit the
branch to avail of the services and hence their location is important. The branch network is
influenced by various factors including the banks' own business policies and the branch
licensing policy of RBI. The branch layout affects the customers' experience feeling and
hence is important.
Telecommunications and computing facilities have enabled several outlets for banks like
telephone banking and call centres, ATMs, home banking, net banking and virtual branches.
Physical distribution covers the activities of transport, distribution, and storage of goods
between the stages of production to purchase by the consumer. This is affected by several
factors like nature of product, place of production, etc. Several costs are associated with this
function, which now are one of the major cost components. Considerable scope exists for
reduction in distribution costs. Various tasks involved in this function include demand
forecast, order processing and inventory management covering storage, protective packaging
and transport.
37.5 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS
1. Please choose the correct alternative for the following statements:
(a) Marketing channel refers to
(i) a physical channel for movement of goods from the seller to the buyer, (ii) a set of firms
who handle the physical movement of goods from one point to another, (iii) different
departments of the producer firm which are associated in ensuring delivery of
goods to the buyer, (iv) a set of independent organisations involved in the process of making
a product or service
available for use or consumption.
(b) The functions of distribution channel do not include
(i) gathering and providing market information.
(ii) marketing research.
(iii) assisting the consumer in understanding and using the goods, (iv) promoting the sales of
goods.
(c) Which of the following characteristics is found only in some services like banking
and not
found in case of many services.
(i) inseparability (ii) variability
(iii) client relationship(iv) perishability
2. Please state whether these statements are True or False:
(a) The maximum number of entities at any of the levels in a distribution channel is
called the
length of the channel.
(b) In selection of the marketing channel, the product characteristics are relevant and
market
characteristics are of no consequence.
419
(c) Banking is a service industry, however, as it is experience oriented, the layout of the
branch along with the interior decor make an impact on the customer.
37.6 ANSWERS TO 'CHECK YOUR PROGRESS'
1. (a)-(iv), (b)-(ii), (c)-(iii); 2. (a) False; (b) False, (c) True.
37.7 KEYWORDS
Distribution Channel, Intermediaries, Credit Cards, Debit Cards, Exchange Points, Orders,
Warehouse, Inventory Management, Just-in-time, Distribution Centre.
CHANNEL MANAGEMENT
STRUCTURE
38.0 Objectives
38.1 Introduction
38.2 Meaning of Marketing Channel System
38.3 Channel Levels
38.4 Channel Dynamics
38.5 Advantages
38.6 Let Us Sum Up
38.7 Check Your Progress
38.8 Answers to 'Check Your Progress'
38.9 Keywords
422
38.0 OBJECTIVES
A Study of the unit will help you to:
• understand the concepts of channel management
• appreciate the channel levels and channel dynamics
• know the benefits of channel management
38.1 INTRODUCTION
Channel management is also called as IT channel management, distribution channel
management, channel sales management and sales channel management. To reach a target
market, the marketer uses three kinds of marketing channels, viz., the communication
channels, the distribution channels and the service channels. Channel management is the
development of policies and procedures to gain and maintain the cooperation of various
institutions within the sell-side distribution channel.
38.2 MEANING OF MARKETING CHANNEL SYSTEM
Most producers do not sell their goods directly to the final users; between them stands a set of
intermediaries performing a variety of functions. These intermediaries constitute a marketing
channel. Some intermediaries such as wholesalers and retailers buy, take title to and resell the
merchandise. They are called merchants. Others - brokers, manufacturers' representatives,
sales agents - search for customers and may negotiate on the producer's behalf, but do not
take title to the goods. They are called agents. Still others - transportation companies,
independent warehouses, banks, advertising agencies — assist in the distribution process but
neither do they take title to goods nor do negotiate purchases or sales and they are called
facilitators.
Marketing channels are sets of interdependent organisations involved in the process of
marketing a product or a service available for use or consumption. Marketing channel
decisions are the most critical decisions facing management. The company's channel
decisions involve relatively long-term commitments to other firms, company's pricing,
advertising decisions, etc.
38.3 CHANNEL LEVELS
All channel functions have three things in common: They use up scarce resources; they can
often be performed better through specialisation and they can be shifted among channel
members. It can be classified as follows:
Zero level - Direct marketing channel, e.g. Internet sale, door to door sale. One level -
Contains one selling intermediary such as a retailer. Two level - Contains two selling
intermediaries, viz., wholesaler and a retailer. Three level - Wholesaler, who sells to jobbers,
who in turn sell to retailers.
The concept of marketing channels is not limited to distribution of physical goods. Service
sector has also to ensure that their output is made available and accessible to the target
population. As internet technology has advanced, service industry like banking, insurance,
travel, security trading etc. have started selling their products through these new channels.
For instance, People's Bank, based in Connecticut uses its web site as a key channel for
reaching individuals, business customers and prospects. Not only can customers e-mail the
bank with questions; they can click on a link to have a bank representative call them with
further information or choose another link if they want to chat online. In addition, prospects
can open new accounts online, print out
423
and fax account applications and even order printed cheques with a few keystrokes apart from
having access to insurance products - say an auto, home and other personal insurance, as
well.
38.4 CHANNEL DYNAMICS
Distribution channels do not stand still. New wholesaling and retailing institutions emerge,
new channel systems evolve. Channels swell vertically, horizontally and through multi-
channels. Today's banks are multiplying the number of ''go-to-market" or hybrid channels, i.e.
they use all the channel alternatives for marketing their services.
Vertical marketing system (VMS): It implies that the producer, wholesaler and retailer acting
as a unified system. In a service sector like banks, it can be a corporate or administered VMS
where the different products like deposits and advances are channelled through the branch
offices, who act on behalf of the management. The customer is assisted by various levels to
finally market the required product as per his choice.
Horizontal marketing system: It is one in which two or more unrelated companies put
together resources or programmes to exploit an emerging marketing opportunity. For
instance, many supermarket chains have arrangements with local banks to offer in-store
banking. Trends have already seen in banks where they shake hands with insurance
companies to market their products, viz., policies along with the various loan products like
educational loans, housing loans, etc.
Multi-channel marketing systems: With the proliferation of customer segments and channel
possibilities, more companies have adopted multi-channel marketing. It occurs when a single
firm uses two or more marketing channels to reach one or more customer segments. For
instance, a bank may try to sell its products through internet, marketing officials, outsourcing,
opening ATM counters, branch banking, maintaining liaison with stock broking companies to
accommodate their trading deals offering credit limits, etc., The chain goes on and on and on.
38.5 ADVANTAGES
Channel management helps organisations improve their bottom line by increasing the
efficiency of internal and channel partner teams. It helps the sales team attract and retain
customers, reduce administrative time, provide robust account management and drive higher
revenues. Channel management helps you to develop your partner network with important
functions like lead sharing, channel training, programme and fund management and the
electronic procurement of products and services from the vendor to partner.
The Interwoven channel management (ICM) connects businesses with their direct and
indirect channels through information, business processes and sales applications to streamline
the sales process and realise more profitable channels. ICM integrates with market leading
and custom developed web portals, mobile devices and e-mail systems to expand the profit
potential of agents, account executives, resellers and distributors, while reducing the cost to
support them by up to 70 per cent.
The solution enables organisations to develop specialised intranets for direct sales channels
and extra nets for indirect sales channels to fuel sales momentum. Further, enterprise
application connectors enable customers to combine powerful content management
capabilities with portal technology from vendors such as IBM, SEA, and SAP. These portals
empower the enterprise's extended sales team through self-service delivery of the most
relevant sales information-including marketing collateral and presentations, product
information and documentation, training materials, competitive intelligence and catalogue
data. The results are lower costs for channel support and greater productivity for direct and
indirect sales people.
424
In short, the advantages of channel management, though beyond quantification, can be
summarised to definitely cover three benefits that can be easily noticed:
1. Increased market coverage.
2. Lower channel cost - for instance activating mobile banking rather than corresponding
individually
with customers.
3. More customised selling - using the technological advancement to mutual advantage
and using the
technical/marketing personnel to sell more complex products.
38.6 LET US SUM UP
An effective channel management warrants research in value perceptions and needs of the
target customers, examination of company's and competitor's performance, identification of
gaps and implementation of corrective measures, monitoring of constraints and implementing
a suitable design. Channel management may comprise channel marketing, channel sales,
channel service or channel commerce.
Channel management provides a source to the companies when they lack financial resources
to carry out direct marketing. Marketing channels are characterised by continuous and
sometimes dramatic changes. Deciding on which type of channel to use calls for analysing
customer needs, establishing channel objectives, identifying and evaluating the major
alternatives, including the types and the number of intermediaries involved in the channel. It
is applicable to the service sector as well. The company/ management must determine
whether to distribute its products exclusively, selectively or intensively and must clearly spell
out the terms and responsibilities of each channel member. The primary purpose of channel
management in marketing is to sell more products to more people more often for more
money/better margin in order to make more profits. However, channel arrangements are up to
the company, but there are certain legal and ethical issues to be considered with regard to
practices such as tying agreements, dealer's rights, etc.
38.7 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS
1. Say whether the following statements is True or False:
(a) Channel management concentrates on more productivity than profitability.
(b) Channel management is free from legal issues.
(c) Hybrid and multi-channels have opened up due to changes in market scenario.
(d) Decisions of channel have a critical role in deciding a company's vision.
(e) Channel management paves a way for effective physical, title, payment, information
and promotion flow in an organisation.
38.8 ANSWERS TO 'CHECK YOUR PROGRESS'
1. (a) False, (b) False, (c) True, (d) True, (e) True.
38.9 KEYWORDS
Marketing Channel System, Intermediaries, Vertical Marketing System (VMS), Hirizontal
Marketing System (HMS), Multi-Channel, Channel Dynamics
PROMOTION
STRUCTURE
39.0 Objectives
39.1 Introduction
39.2 Role of Promotion in Marketing
39.3 Promotion Mix
39.3.1 Components of Promotion Mix
39.3.2 Promotion Mix Strategies
39.3.3 Factors Influencing the Promotion Mix
39.3.4 Promotion Mix Integration
39.4 Let Us Sum Up
39.5 Check Your Progress
39.6 Answers to 'Check Your Progress'
39.7 Keywords
426
39.0 OBJECTIVES
In this unit, we shall seek to know and understand:
• Role of promotion
• Promotion mix
• Components of promotion mix
• Promotion-mix strategies
• Factors influencing promotion mix
• Promotion mix integration
39.1 INTRODUCTION
Promotion is the fourth and last P of the marketing mix, but in no way the least important of
these. While a good product at a reasonable price delivered at the appropriate place and time
are essentials of the marketing mix, these need the support of an attractive promotion mix, so
that the consumers become aware of the offering. The prospective customers needs to be
informed about the features of the offering and the needs it would satisfy. Traditionally, the
communication process with the customer was confined to the promotion mix. However, now
other elements of the marketing mix are also used as communication tools. Thus, the
promotion mix has enlarged to cover the other elements also. The ultimate success of the
marketing endeavours is dependent on how effective the promotion strategy has been in
reaching the market and influencing the consumers appropriately.
39.2 ROLE OF PROMOTION IN MARKETING
Promotion is the exercise of communicating the properties of different elements of marketing
mix to the customers with the intention of influencing them. The promotion efforts aim to
encourage the customer to move through various stages of the decision-making process
towards buying the offerings made by the firm. This involves the following aims:
(a) Persuasion: Promotion aims at persuading the consumers so that they start acting in
favour of the firm. Persuasion seeks to bring about a change in attitude.
(b) Inform: Promotion aims at conveying information about the properties of products to
the prospects, to influence their desires and transform them into action.
(c) Reminding: Promotion seeks to remind the customers about the offerings of the firm
with a view to retaining their business and to have a higher share in it.
(d) Reinforcing: Promotion also aims at reinforcing the customer satisfaction. This helps
in increasing the number of habitual customers.
Promotion thus is an exercise of maintaining the contact with the consumer at different levels
and in different manners to build, maintain and enhance the customer relationship, which is
the ultimate objective of marketing. When a bank organises a seminar addressed by a
distinguished management thinker and invites its customers to this event, it is not talking
about its services, yet it is communicating with its customers and nurturing the relationship
with them. Similarly, a bank by sponsoring a social awareness campaign relating to AIDS,
though it has nothing to do with banking services, communicates to its customers, its concern
for issues of importance to the society and individuals.
39.3 PROMOTION MIX
Promotion means activities that communicate the merits of product and persuade target
customers to buy it. Promotion is a mix of several tools. The objective of the promotion
activities is to deliver a clear.
427
consistent and compelling message about the organisation and its products. The promotion
mix comprises the following tools, as shown in Figure 39.1.
Blended Mix of Promotion Tools
Advertising Pers Seonal
ling
i 1
Sales Promotion
Public Relations
Direct
Marketing
FIGURE 39.1 Integrated Marketing Communications
Besides the above-mentioned tools, which form the part of promotion mix specifically,
certain aspects of other elements of market mix (product, price and place) also communicate
something to the buyers. Thus, the design of the product, the shape and colour of packaging,
the price, and the stores that sell the product also communicate about the product.
The role of promotion mix has changed significantly, as the complexion of markets has
changed. Mass markets have fragmented. Improvements in information technology is
speeding the movement towards a segmented marketing. Nevertheless, there is a need for
each of the element of marketing mix to be blended so that integrated marketing
communications take place.
39.3.1 Components of Promotion Mix
Let us briefly discuss each of the components of marketing mix.
(a) Advertising
Advertising is an important paid form of non-personal presentation and promotion. It is a
means of reaching the masses at a relatively low cost per exposure. It reaches people
geographically dispersed and can be repeated several times. Advertising through print media,
radio and television has a wider reach. The use of colour, visuals, sound and print make
advertising very expressive. Consumers carry a positive image of the seller and the success of
the product in case of large-scale advertising. However, advertisements are impersonal as
they address a large audience. They permit only a one-way communication. Some forms of
advertising require a large budget. These are generally useful for a nationwide launch of a
new product or for building up long-term image. The larger banks, which are operating on a
national level (the public sector banks, foreign banks, and larger private sector banks),
advertise in national dailies, periodicals, television, etc., and find advertisements in national
dailies, periodicals, television, etc., useful. Besides, they also use the local advertisement
media like hoardings on roads, railway stations, bus stands, railway platforms, etc., which
have a reach to the masses. Smaller banks like urban co-operative banks, small regional
banks on the other hand prefer the regional or local press media, hoardings in local markets,
etc. This suits them better as their target market is restricted to a smaller area and these match
their low budgetary resources.
428
(b) Personal Selling
It includes personal presentation by the firm's sales force to the prospective customer(s) for
the purpose of making sales. It involves a personal interaction between the buyer and the
seller. It is most effective at a certain stage of the buying process. During the process of
personal selling, the buyer's needs better understood and quick adjustments can be made in
the offerings to satisfy these. It helps in developing the long-term relationship between the
sales personnel and the consumer. It is, however, a costlier method and a sales force has to be
maintained, which cannot be resized quickly. Personal selling is gaining significance for
banks. It is used in both wholesale segment and retail segment.
Ask any person scouting for a housing loan, one simply has to telephone some banks and
their representatives will call at one's home or office at the customer's convenience (be it a
holiday or a Sunday; late evening or early morning) with the necessary forms, literatures, etc.
For corporate customers, banks make presentations at various levels. The top executives of
banks make sales calls on the CEOs and other senior executives of the corporate. Besides,
banks often develop specific solution strategies for meeting certain specific needs for some of
the corporate (for example, a payment collection system for a utility organisation)
organisation and make a presentation of these strategies to the concerned decision-making
authorities of the customer organisation.
(c) Sales Promotion
It is a campaign to encourage the purchase or sale of a product by offering short-term
incentives like coupons, contests, premiums, cents-off deals, etc. These help attract consumer
attention and offer strong incentives to purchase and reward quick response. Thus, the
consumer is attracted to "act NOW". Though the sales promotion results in a quick increase
in sales, during the campaign period, they have not been found to be as effective for building
a long-term brand preference or image. Sales campaigns have been used by banks for many
years. "Deposit Mobilisation Fortnights" were conducted feverishly by the public sector
banks, even before the setting up of the new generation private sector banks could be
imagined. During such campaigns, banks would present some giveaways to the depositors.
Non-monetary incentives were also used, signing the deposit receipts or passbooks. We now
find sales promotion for consumer loans like auto loans or housing loans which are
accompanied with an offer of special rates of interest, waiver of processing fee, etc., during
festival season.
(d) Public Relations
Public relations is building of good relations with various entities like consumers, suppliers,
shareholders, etc., by obtaining favourable publicity, building up a good corporate image and
handling unfavourable rumours, events, etc. News stories, features, sponsorships have a
greater credibility than the advertisements. It can be very effective and economical, if used
appropriately. A common exercise of public relations, nowadays, is the practice of a press
statement of the chairman or the managing director of the bank appearing at the time of
announcement of the quarterly results of the bank. Besides, press statements of top executives
of banks appear frequently in press on occasions like opening of new branches, centenary
year celebrations, announcement of credit policy by RBI, Central Government budget, any
new initiative taken by bank in adoption of technology or new process, for example,
migration to CBS. Banks also sponsor certain events may be cultural (like stage performances
by classical music artists, painting exhibitions, college/university annual fete), social (say
blood donation camps, eye test or dental check up drive), charitable (say programmes in the
aid of institutions of blind, orphanages, Tsunami rehabilitation works, etc.). While such
associations do not directly impinge on the banking business, they serve the purpose of
enhancing the recognition of banks among various sections of the society. And let us
remember that the customer group of banks is the entire society.
429
(e) Direct Marketing
It is the process of making direct connections with the individual prospective customers to
obtain immediate response and to build up lasting relationship. It is non-public and is
addressed to a specific person. It is immediate, customised and interactive. It is well suited to
highly targeted marketing efforts.
Direct marketing is a relatively new approach for the goods producers, but for banks, direct
marketing has always been there, although minus the focus on customer (due to lack of
appreciation of need for marketing in banking). While the trend in banking during the recent
past has been the opposite, banks are using the services of direct sales agents (DSAs) for their
financial products. Direct marketing is gaining significance particularly with the advent of
Internet and web-based businesses. Direct marketing in banks will continue to be important
and will acquire new dimensions.
The case of Dell Computers of USA is a pioneering success story of direct marketing
approach. The direct marketing and selling is now practised by many companies in very
innovative ways. Take the case of Tupperware, Amway or even the Grameen Bank of
Bangladesh, who make consumers the members, further, these members do the marketing for
the organisation.
The different platforms available for promotion under different components are listed in
Table 39.1. Each of these platforms has different characteristics and they have different
criteria for determining their suitability. A discussion on these aspects is beyond the scope of
this presentation.
TABLE 39.1 Different Platforms Available for Promotion
Advertising Sales Public Personal Direct
Promotion Relations SellingMarketing
Print Ads Contests, games, Press Kits Sales Catalogues
Broadcast Adssweepstakes, Speeches presentations Mailings
Packaging-outer lotteries Seminars Sales meetingsTelemarketing
Packaging inserts Premiums and Annual reportsIncentive Electronic
Motion pictures gifts Charitable programmes shopping
Brochures andSampling donations Samples TV shopping
booklets Fairs and tradeSponsorships Fairs and tradeFax mail
Posters and shows Publications shows E-mail
leafletsExhibits Community Voice mail
Directories Demonstrations Relations
Reprints of ads Coupons Lobbying
Bill boards Rebates Identity media
Display signs Low-interest Company
Point-of-purchase financing magazine
displays Entertainment Events
Audio-visual Trade-in-
material allowances
Symbols and logos Continuity
Videotapes programmes
Tie-ins
39.3.2 Promotion Mix Strategies
There are two basic promotion mix strategies - push strategy and pull strategy.
(a) Push strategy: In this, promotion efforts are directed at the channel members to induce
them to purchase the products and sell them to the final consumer. This is done through
personal selling and trade promotions.
430
(b) Pull strategy: In this, the promotion efforts are directed to the final consumer to induce
them to buy the product. Consumers will then demand the product from the retailer, who, in
turn, will demand from the wholesaler and the producers. Thus, the product experiences the
"pull" of demand.
There may be some companies who use only the push strategy, while some others who use
only the pull strategy. However, in most cases a combination of the two is generally used.
In case of banks, however, the pull strategy is the one which is more relevant as its services
cannot generally be "pushed" down to the customers through the channel members except for
the annual business targets for channel members. Banks are adopting the "push" strategy in a
different way -credit cards being offered on telephone or upgraded cards even mailed to the
consumer without being applied for, personal loans being offered without even an inquiry
being made by the consumer are a variant of push strategy or the hard sell tactics. The retail
loan products were pushed in the market by the banks and the customers were attracted by
them, this way, creating the market using push strategy.
39.3.3 Factors Influencing the Promotion Mix
Three major factors affecting the choice of promotion mix are type of product, buyer
readiness stage, and life-cycle stage of the product.
(a) Type of Product/Market
The promotion mix chosen by the firms depends to a large extent on the nature of product.
Consumer goods producers lay greater emphasis on advertisements followed by sales
promotion, personal selling and then public relations. In case of industrial goods,
manufacturers personal selling gets the greatest emphasis followed by sales promotion,
advertising and public relations. Banks, for garnering fixed deposits typically use
advertisements and press statements whenever there is a change of interest rates for
promotion. Personal selling of fixed deposits is more in the nature of cross selling to the
savings account holders (especially those with large balances in their accounts or having
higher transaction volume). However, in case of certificate of deposits or cash management
services targeted at corporate customers, personal selling is more suitable.
(b) Buyers' Readiness Stage
The buyers pass through various stages before they finally decide to buy a product. Various
stages of the buyers' readiness are shown in the Figure 39.2. Depending on the stage of the
buyers' readiness, various promotion tools have different effect on them. In the early stages
when the buyers are not aware of the product, the advertisement and public relations have a
major role in creating awareness and knowledge. At a later stage, it is necessary to influence
customer liking, preferences, and convictions. For this purpose, personal selling is more
useful.
431
For promoting a new variety of fixed deposits, a bank may find a mix of advertisements and
public relations supported by some personal selling by the front office staff suitable.
However, for sale of technology products, the buyers' acceptability is yet in infancy (a very
small percentage of pensioners use ATM) and these would need more emphasis on personal
selling to the customers (individual or groups). Kellogg, when it launched the cereal breakfast
products in India, realised that in India, it is first needed to sell the concept of "cereal
breakfast" to sell the products.
(c) Product Life Cycle Stage
Product life cycle is an important factor which influences the promotion mix. This is so,
because of the peculiar characteristics of the different stages of product life cycle requiring
different approaches in promotion. Thus, in the introduction stage of a new product, there is a
need to create a high level of awareness, for which advertising and public relations are
suitable. Consumers need to be attracted for trying the new product, for which sales
promotion would be useful. Further, for trade intermediaries, personal selling will be
required. At the growth stage, while advertisement and public relations, will impact on the
market considerably, sales promotion is not necessary as incentives would be less relevant.
But, at the maturity stage, the position reverses and sales promotion gains significance to
attract more buying decisions. Advertising, serves the purpose of a reminder at the decline
stage, but public relations is irrelevant at this stage and sales persons do not need to devote
much time to the product. Sales promotion can help in reducing the decline rate and thus
prolonging this stage.
39.3.4 Promotion Mix Integration
Firms need to implement promotion programmes with various elements of promotion mix, in
a manner, which reflects an integrated cohesive approach. Firms need to analyse the trends
and identify areas in which promotions can help the most and develop promotional tactics
based on the strengths and weaknesses of each communication. The contact points for the
company and its brands need to be identified and it is necessary to ensure that
communications at various points are consistent with the overall communications policy. The
communications effort should be evolved according to the expectations of the customers in
this regard. The communications across different media should carry unique primary
messages and selling points. The themes, tones and quality across various media should be
compatible.
Integrated promotion communications produce stronger message consistency and greater
sales impact. It makes the firms think about the way the customer comes in contact and the
way in which the firm communicates with the customer. It improves the ability to reach the
right customers with right messages at the right time and the right place.
39.4 LET US SUM UP
Firms need to communicate with the consumers. Promotion mix, primarily serves this
function, although product, distribution and price also communicate. Promotion encourages
the customer to move through various stages of decision-making through persuasion,
information, reminder and reinforcement. Promotion mix helps in building and maintaining
contact with the customer at various levels and thus enhances the customer relationship.
Promotion mix has five components namely, advertising, sales promotion, public relations,
personal selling and direct marketing. Advertising is a paid and non-personal communication
which is useful in creating or increasing knowledge and awareness. Public relations are also
useful in creating or increasing awareness and in building good relations. Sales promotion is
a campaign for attracting consumer attention and induces buying decisions through strong
incentives. Personal selling and direct marketing are
!432
personal communications with the customer and address his specific needs. They are useful
in creating a great influence in the final stages of decision-making.
Promotion mix is determined by the type of market/product, the stage of the buyers' readiness
and the life cycle stage of the product. Strategically, the promotion mix can have two
approaches "push strategy" directed at the channel intermediaries and "pull strategy" directed
at the consumers.
These components need blending to give an integrated marketing communications. Integrated
marketing communications create a strong message consistency and great sales impact.
39.5 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS
1. (a) The tools for communications with the customer are
(i) Promotion mix (ii) Product and price (iii) (i) and (ii) (iv) (i) and other three elements of
marketing mix
(b) Promotion seeks to influence the buyer in decision-making through
(i) Persuasion
(ii) Compulsion
(iii) Reminding
(iv) (i), (iii), information and reinforcement
(c) Promotion is an exercise of maintaining contact with the consumer at different levels
so as to
(i) enhance customer relationship
(ii) lure the customer in to buying the products
(iii) prevent customer from being critical of the firm
(iv) none of the above
2. State whether the following statements are True or False.
(a) Promotion mix of a firm includes public relations.
(b) In integrated marketing communications, the elements of promotion mix are blended.
(c) Buyers' behaviour stage is not relevant for determining the promotion mix.
39.6 ANSWERS TO 'CHECK YOUR PROGRESS'
1. (a)-(iv), (b)-(iv), (c)-(i); 2. (a) True, (b) True, (c) False.
39.7 KEYWORDS
Promotion Mix, Advertising, Sales Promotion, Public Relations, Personal Selling, Direct
Marketing, Integrated Marketing Communications, Promotion Mix Strategies - Particular
Combinations of Elements of Promotion Mix with a Common Objective, Push Strategy, Pull
Strategy, Buyers' Readiness Stages -The Stages Consumers Normally Pass through on their
Way to Purchase, Including Awareness, Knowledge, Liking, Preference, Conviction and
Purchase.
ROLE OF DIRECT SELLING AGENT/DIRECT MARKETING AGENT IN A BANK
STRUCTURE
40.0 Objectives
40.1 Introduction
40.2 Direct Selling (DS)
40.3 Direct Marketing (DM)
40.4 Relevance of DS/DM to Bank
40.5 Banker as a DSA/DMA and His Job Role
40.6 Channels of Delivery in a Bank
40.7 Benefits of Direct Marketing
40.8 Let Us Sum Up
40.9 Check Your Progress
40.10 Answers to 'Check Your Progress'
40.11 Keywords
434
40.0 OBJECTIVES
After going through the unit, we will be able to:
• understand the concepts of direct selling and direct marketing.
• appreciate the role of direct selling/direct marketing agent, with reference to the bank.
• comprehend the delivery channels in a bank.
• evaluate the utilities and benefits of direct marketing/selling.
40.1 INTRODUCTION
Bulk of the goods and services are sold through stores. Non-store retailing falls into four
major categories: direct selling, direct marketing (which includes telemarketing and internet
selling), automatic vending and buying services. The non-store jobs have slowly diversified
to the service sector, like banking and insurance companies.
40.2 DIRECT SELLING (PS)
It is also called as multi-level selling or network marketing. In this, the company sells door-
to-door or at home sales parties. A salesperson goes to the home of a host who has invited
friends. The salesperson demonstrates the products and takes orders. The marketing sales
system consists of recruiting independent business people who act as distributors. The
distributor's compensation includes a percentage of sales of those that the distributor recruits
as well as earnings on direct sales to customers. These direct selling firms, now finding fewer
consumers at home, are developing multi-distribution strategies.
Examples: Amway, Tupperware, etc.
40.3 DIRECT MARKETING (DM)
It is an interactive marketing system that uses one or more media to affect a measurable
response or transaction at any location. Direct marketing, especially electronic marketing, is
showing explosive growth. Direct marketing has roots in direct-mail and catalogue marketing
which includes telemarketing, television direct-response marketing (home shopping network)
and electronic shopping (Amazon.com).
Direct marketing is the use of the consumer-direct (CD) channels to reach and deliver goods
and services to customers without using marketing middlemen. These channels include direct
mail, catalogue, telemarketing, interactive TV, kiosks, web sites and mobile devices. Direct
marketing is one of the fastest growing avenues for serving customers. Today, many direct
marketers use direct marketing to build a long-term relationship with the customer (customer
relationship marketing). They send birthday cards, information material or small premiums to
select customers.
40.4 RELEVANCE OF DS/DM TO BANKS
Gone are the days when the people working in a bank went out for a mass deposit
mobilisation campaign giving mere conventional loans, etc. There has been a paradigm shift
in the way the banks have been functioning over the past decade. From being branch centric,
they have become totally technology centric. This has helped the sector from being highly
supply driven to being customer-oriented and totally demand driven by offering highly
focused customer services and products. Channels are not only direct but are available online
or at work site. Banks have transformed from a totally computed environment to core
banking system linking all the bank branches as a single branch, data being maintained at a
nodal point termed as "Centralised Data Centre" (CDC).
435
Banks are also forming strategic alliance with other companies like insurance companies and
other banks for diversification in the market. Multifarious deposit products are available to
the customer with various tags of his choice for convertibility, transfer, etc. Retail loan
products and other loan products swelling day in and day out. Banks, even though they
belong to the service sector, build strong customer relationships through frequent award
programmes and club programmes. Banks mine their database to identify the prospects who
would have the interest in an offer. They use their interaction as an opportunity to up-sell,
cross-sell and deepen the relationship. The extraordinary growth of direct marketing is the
result of many factors. Higher costs of driving, traffic congestion, parking headaches, lack of
time, shortage of retail sales help and lines at checkout counters all encourage at-home
shopping. The growth of Internet, e-mail, mobile phones has made product selection much
simpler.
40.5 BANKER AS A PSA/DMA AND HIS JOB ROLE
In a bank branch, the "Direct Selling Agent/Direct Marketing Agent" (DS A/DMA) is the
branch manager, officer/managers, marketing managers, the front line people and the substaff
who offer various services. Banking offers the various non-conventional services to the
customer through its various delivery channels.
The job of the DMA/DSA is to collect the information about the customer, with all details
and create a database, create awareness among the customers, educate them about the user
friendliness of the system, convince them about the security aspects as well, generate reports
to accommodate the needs of the customer and management, improvise the system to cater to
the needs of the customer and watch out for optimum utilisation of the available resources to
reach effective customer service. The challenging technological revolution also calls for
reorientation and re training to combat the growing demands.
40.6 CHANNELS OF DELIVERY IN A BANK
The channels through which a bank offers its services are:
1. ATM Counters: They serve as worksite channels for customers for withdrawal of cash
from their account maintained with any bank, take a printout of the same, know the balance
in their account,
etc. Now some ATMs are enabled to do transfer transactions also.
2. Net Banking: It facilitates customer to access his account and do transactions on line
from his own place where he has a computer with a net facility.
3. Phone Banking: Customers are given a T pin which enables them to access their
account and give instructions for carrying out the transactions.
4. Mobile Banking: Customers are given an M pin which helps them to do transactions
like instructions to issue cheque book, know the balance, receive SMS alerts, etc.
5. Real time Gross Settlement System/SWIFT: Enables customers to transfer funds to
another account within the shortest time.
6. Single Window System: Customers can reach a bank branch counter to have all his
needs satisfied in the same counter viz., receipt/payment of cash, transfer of funds, etc.
7. Online Trading Accounts: This enables customers to view their account and buy/sell
securities as per their choice.
8. Cash Management Scheme/CMS: This enables customers to realise the outstation
cheques
immediately or within 1/2/3/4 days as per their wish.
9. Linking Banking and Insurance Related Products: Customers not only transact with
bank products but also take the relevant insurance policies to take care of their investment
and interest requirements.
436
10. Convertible Accounts/SWAP Facilities: Customers can instruct the banker to transfer
the surplus funds in their savings/current account to deposit account and vice versa, if funds
are required for immediate use.
11. Credit Cards: These enable customers to make any purchase at any point of sales
using bank funds and make payment after 45 or 50 days.
12. Debit Cards: These enable customer to debit his deposit account and make payment
whenever purchases are made.
13. Kiosks: These are small buildings or structures that might house a selling or
information unit. The term describes free standing carts or computer-linked vending
machines and "customer order placing machines" and these form part of direct selling tool.
Day in and day out the cluster products are fast increasing with optional diversities making
many new products available to the customer. When a customer tenders an application form
for opening a normal savings bank account, the various options/facilities available with it are
taken care of. A customer is able to access to his account through the various channels as
mentioned above and give instructions to the bank for issue of chequebook, transfer funds to
another account with the same branch or anywhere else or to his distribution centres that
maintain accounts with various branches, use the ATM counters for cash withdrawal, take a
print out of his statement of accounts, do a shopping using his credit/debit cards (also called
plastic money), use the kiosks at his will and wish to get to know the details, down load
deposit and loan application forms, know about the various facilities and schemes available in
the bank. A customer is also free to transact his account and transfer funds to his supplier's
account maintained with another bank that is a member of the gateway.
40.7 BENEFITS OF DIRECT MARKETING
1. It saves time and introduces customer to the various selection of products.
2. It is convenient, easy and hassle free for the customer.
3. Various products are available at customer's disposition.
4. It opens various delivery channels to the customer.
5. Banks can offer a real time, customised and personalised marketing.
6. It reduces the operational cost.
7. It saves man hours and manpower in banks.
8. It enables the banker to cater to the needs of individuals, both the commoner and the-
techno
savvy.
9. It enables the banker to use his available time for doing marketing jobs.
10. It enables deployment of available manpower for other jobs.
11. It relieves the banker from the mundane jobs of book adjustment, reconciliation, etc.
Code of Conduct for Direct Selling Agents/ Direct Marketing Agents
1. Tele-calling a Prospect (a prospective customer): A prospect is to be contacted for
sourcing a bank product or bank related product only under the following circumstances:
- When prospect has expressed a desire to acquire a product, through the bank's internet
site/
call centre/branch or through the relationship manager at the bank or has been referred to by
another prospect/customer or is an existing customer of the bank who has given consent for
accepting calls on other products of the bank.
- When the prospect's name/telephone no./address is available and has been taken from
one of
the lists/directories/databases approved by the DSA manager/team leader, after taking his/her
consent.
437
Telephonic contact must normally be limited between 0930 Hrs and 1900 Hrs. However, it
may be ensured that a prospect is contacted only when the call is not expected to
inconvenience him/her. Calls earlier or later than the prescribed time period may be placed
only under the following conditions:
When the prospect has expressly authorised DSA/DMA to do so, either in writing or orally.
DSA should respect a prospect's privacy. The prospect's interest may normally be discussed
only with the prospect and any other individual/ family member such as prospect's
accountant/secretary/ spouse, authorized by the prospect.
2. Leaving messages and contacting persons other than the prospect: Calls must first be
placed to the prospect. In the event the prospect is not available, a message may be left for
him/her. The aim of the message should be to get the prospect to return the call or to check
for a convenient time to call again. Ordinarily, such messages may be restricted to:
- Please leave a message that XXXXX (Name of officer) representing XXXBank called
and requested to call back at ZZZZZZ (phone number).
As a general rule, the message must indicate:
- That the purpose of the call is regarding selling or distributing a bank product of
XXXBank.
3. No misleading statements/misrepresentations permitted: DSAIDMA should not:
- Mislead the prospect on any service/product offered;
- Mislead the prospect about their business or organisation's name, or falsely represent
themselves.
- Make any false/unauthorised commitment on behalf of XXXbank for any
facility/service.
4. Telemarketing Etiquettes:
PRE-CALL
No calls prior to 0930 Hrs or post 1900 Hrs unless specifically requested.
- No serial dialling.
- No calling on lists, unless list is cleared by team leader.
DURING CALL
- Identify yourself, your company and your principal.
- Request permission to proceed.
- If denied permission, apologise and politely disconnect.
- State reason for your call.
- Always offer to call back on landline, if call is made to a cell number.
- Never interrupt or argue.
- To the extent possible, talk in the language which is most comfortable to the prospect.
- Keep the conversation limited to business matters.
- Check for understanding of "Most Important Terms and Conditions" by the customer
if he
plans to buy the product.
- Reconfirm next call or next visit details.
- Provide your telephone no, your supervisor's name or your bank officer contact details
if
asked for by the customer.
- Thank the customer for his/her time.
POST-CALL
- Customers, who have expressed their lack of interest for the offering should not be
called for
the next three months with the same offer.
- Provide feedback to the bank on customers who have expressed their desire to be
flagged
"Do Not Disturb."
- Never call or entertain calls from customers regarding products already sold. Advise
them to
contact the "Customer Service Staff of the bank.
438
5. Gifts or bribes: DSA/DMA must not accept gifts from prospects or bribes of any kind.
Any DSA/ DMA offered a bribe or payment of any kind by a customer must report the offer
to his/her management.
6. Precautions to be taken on visits/contacts:
DSA/DMA should:
- Respect personal space - maintain adequate distance from the prospect.
- Not enter the prospect's residence/office against his/her wishes.
- Not visit in large numbers - i.e. not more than one DMA and one supervisor, if
required.
- Respect the prospect's privacy.
- If the prospect is not present and only family members/office persons are present at
the time of the visit, he/she should end the visit with a request for the prospect to call back.
- Provide his/her telephone number, supervisor's name or the concerned bank officer's
contact details, if asked for by the customer.
- Limit discussions with the prospect to the business - Maintain a professional distance.
7. Other Important Aspects - Appearance and Dress Code: DSA/DMAs must be
appropriately dressed -
For men this means
- Well ironed trousers;
- Well ironed shirt, shirt sleeves preferably buttoned down.
For women this means
- Well ironed formal attire (Sari, Suit, etc.);
- Well groomed appearance. '
Jeans and/or T Shirt, open sandals are not considered appropriate. Handling of Letters and
Other Communication
Any communication sent to the prospect should be only in the mode and format approved by
the Bank.
40.8 LET US SUM UP
We have dealt with the concepts of direct selling and direct marketing and its relevance to the
banking industry in the current scenario. Banks have to, necessarily, diverge their functions
owing to changing and challenging customer needs, competition and international market
conditions. Likewise, the role of the banker has drastically changed, from desk functioning to
making available the various delivery channels through various technology coupled
functions. Though the task of creating and retaining customer relationship management
through a robust database is tough, it offers delightful benefits to the customer and widens the
market scope for the banker.
40.9 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS
I. Fill in the Blanks:
1.
2.
3. 4.
5.
and are the channels of non-store retailing.
There has been a paradigm shift in the functioning of industry over the past decade
from branch centric to customer centric.
to combat the
and.
The challenging technological revolution calls for
growing demands.
Banks are able to maintain an effective customer relationship management as a tool for direct
selling/direct marketing by creating and maintaining a full-fledged
Direct selling, is also called as - or __.
439
II. Say if True or False:
1. Service industries like banks and insurance companies have joined hands to market
their products to the customers directly.
2. The term "kiosks" refers to vending machines where a customer can draw cash any
time.
3. Direct selling and direct marketing have reduced the opportunities of expansion in
bank business.
4. All banks in India are using all the delivery channels as a part of the direct
selling/marketing
services.
5. Core banking is an important technique for enabling a customer to use the various e-
banking channels as a direct selling/marketing tool.
40.10 ANSWERS TO 'CHECK YOUR PROGRESS'
I. 1. Direct selling, Direct marketing; 2. Banking; 3. multi-level selling or network-
marketing;
4. re-orientation and retraining; 5. database. II. 1. True, 2. False, 3. False, 4. False, 5. True.
40.11 KEYWORDS
Direct Selling, Direct Marketing, Multi-level Selling.
UNIT
41MARKETING INFORMATION SYSTEMS
A Longitudinal Analysis
STRUCTURE
41.0 Objectives
41.1 Introduction
41.2 Functions of MKIS
41.3 Components of MKIS
41.4 The MKIS Model
41.5 Observations
41.6 Usage of Computers in MKIS
41.7 Supports for Marketing Management
41.8 Supports for Marketing Mix Decisions
41.9 Use of Decision Models
41.10 Performance of MKIS
41.11 Recommendations
41.12 Advantages of MKIS
41.13 Let Us Sum Up
41.14 Check Your Progress
41.15 Answers to 'Check Your Progress'
41.16 Keywords
442
41.0 OBJECTIVES
After a study of the unit, we shall be able to:
• understand the concepts of Marketing Information System (MKIS)
• appreciate the link between computer usage and marketing
• evaluate the effective use of models as a tool of decision support systems
• rationalise the performance of MKIS
41.1 INTRODUCTION
Any organisation is studded with different Ss, Management Information System (MIS),
Computer Information System (CIS), Marketing Information System (MKIS), all of which
aid as a proactive tool for Decision Support System (DSS). In order to carry out marketing
function effectively, firms would need information and data in respect of various aspects
impacting the market of the product or service. Today, the problem is not of paucity of
information but oversupply of information, but this information is not of the type that is
required and not of assured accuracy and it becomes all the more difficult owing to the
ongoing activity and the dynamic nature of the market environment.
The marketing function of a business entity includes many activities. It is "the process of
planning and executing the conception, pricing, promotion and distribution of ideas, goods
and services, to create exchanges that satisfy individual and organisational objectives and
systematic management of the process of collecting, evaluating and disseminating market
information."
According to Samuel Smith and others, "A marketing information system is an interacting,
continuing future-oriented structure of people, equipment and procedures designed to
generate and process an information flow, in order to aid managerial decision-making in a
company's marketing programme. In a nutshell, its main purpose is to satisfy customers,
wants and needs, at a profit". A successful organisation must integrate its functional elements
into a smoothly operating unit. In marketing, this integration is best achieved through the
satisfaction of customer's objectives. Firms that are unable to outperform their competitors in
satisfying the customers are destined to fail. To be able to stay in business, a company must
gather and analyse pertinent information to plan for its marketing actions.
Marketing information system (MKIS) has been the nerve centre of a marketing organisation.
To measure its strengths and weaknesses, one may use its overall status in industries as a
yardstick to identify the progress of MKISs. Apparently, MKISs today are more
sophisticated than before and its usage has increased. However, many companies are not
utilising the latest information technologies and many marketing managers are not satisfied
with their MKISs. The study further discusses possible reasons for the progress and
recommends several actions through which the companies may shape the future of their
MKISs.
41.2 FUNCTIONS OF MKIS
Marketing information system is a tool for dealing with data pertaining to marketing
management. Hence, its functions are related to the process of database management. The
principal functions of MKIS are briefly discussed below:
(a) Collecting and assembling data: Information needs to be collected on a continuous basis
from numerous sources, both internal and external. For the information from internal sources,
various reports or statements are designed (like sales report, accounts report), which
periodically provide information covering the relevant operational aspects. For the
information from external sources, the major part of information flow is from the secondary
sources, including newspapers, trade
443
journals, magazines, reports of market research agencies. Besides, some information is also
procured from the primary sources like, consumers, suppliers, dealers and retailers.
(b) Processing of data: Information collected from various sources is required to be
classified, tabulated,and summarised for facilitating study and critical analysis.
(c) Analysing the data: The collected information is evaluated to find out its accuracy and
reliability. Further the information is processed using various statistical and operations
research tools so that conclusions are drawn for decision-making.
(d) Storage of data: The collected and processed data needs to be stored in a manner that
ensures its preservation, and its ready availability for reference as and when required.
(e) Dissemination of information: The information has to reach the decision-makers for
solving marketing problems and take management decisions.
41.3 COMPONENTS OF MKIS
MKIS consists of four subsystems, which facilitate the entire system. These are:
(a) Internal records system (b) Market intelligence system
(c) Marketing research system (d) Marketing management and science system
Let us briefly discuss the first three mentioned subsystems. The functions of these subsystems
are carried out in every organisation in one way or other.
(a) Internal Marketing Information
The information available from the internal sources is covered by this component. It typically
includes data on sales turnover, cost, cash flows, accounts receivable, etc. The reports of
salesmen on their sales calls contain valuable information relating to company's sales,
consumer behaviour, likes, dislikes and competitors. Certain types of internal data can be
available almost on real-time basis. For example, Wal-Mart the US retail giant tracks the
stock levels on a daily basis and the replenishment orders are sent to its vendors by the
computers. A fully networked bank will know the amounts of aggregate deposits and
advances at the end of the day. Firms need to maintain several databases, data from which can
be combined for'specific purposes.
(b) Marketing Intelligence System
This component covers information from external sources regarding happenings. The
information about developments in marketing environment and changing consumption
patterns of the market is provided by these sources. For this, the major source is the published
information available through the newspapers, magazines, television, trade journals, etc.
Annual reports of trade associations, chambers of commerce, the leading firms in the industry
or trade, etc., include information on market trends. Various research organisations like
Central Statistical Organisation, National Council of Applied Economics and Research,
Thompson consumer Index of Market, etc., are other important sources. Various
intermediaries and players in the market, like selling agents, brokers, dealers and suppliers
have valuable information relating to market and product trend. There are professional market
research agencies like ORG, MARG, IMRB, etc., who can render services of collecting and
providing specific information.
(c) Marketing Research System
Marketing research system concerns with obtaining information pertaining to specific
marketing problems. It is useful for solving present marketing problems related to consumer
behaviour, consumer likes and wants, channels of distribution, competition, product
development, packaging, etc. Normally, data for market research is collected specifically for
the exercise at hand and techniques like field surveys, consumer interview, dealer survey, etc.,
are employed for this purpose. Based on analysis of
444
A good MKIS should satisfy certain basic requirements which are shown below:
• Unified and centralised system
• Support system to marketing decision-makers
• Matching with the level of progress of the organisation
• Cost-effective in maintaining
• Selective in information processing
• Provide information regularly and quickly
(d) Marketing Management and Science System
This combines the effect of the above components, use of the computerised data to the best
advantage in the various sectors, in meeting the needs of MKIS, viz., complex marketing
activity, knowledge/ information explosion, and bridges the communication gap, by taking a
prompt decision, making use of the competitive advantage.
41.4 THE MKIS MODEL
In the 1960s, an MKIS was merely an outgrowth of marketing research. As competition
became increasingly intense, the gathering and management of marketing information
became important. The data needed to make informed decisions exceeded the physical
processing capabilities of most firms. More and more businesses began to establish MKISs.
Typically, a marketing manager uses them to learn about the needs of the marketplace for
new or improved products and services. The MKIS makes it possible for a firm to react
rapidly to the customer needs. Once the product or service has been provided, the marketing
manager may use the MKIS to determine how well the needs are being satisfied. The MKIS
provides managers with marketplace information and this may be used to modify, improve, or
delete products and services. If a company does not have an MKIS, its efficiency and
effectiveness are likely to be severely degraded, weakening its competitive edge. Therefore,
to be able to compete
mife > Data Model fModeTl /
t-^,' Bases Bases X^^1-' Z-
■V 1 ....i !__j..i...J''
Marketing Management Activities
Decisions
FIGURE 41.1 Framework of a Marketing Information System (Source: Information &
Management, 28(1), 1995, 13-31)
445
today, business organisations must have an MKIS. To gain a perspective of MKISs,
researchers have conducted survey studies in 1000 US companies.
In retrospect, the very first descriptive model of MKIS proposed almost thirty years ago may
be attributed to Philip Kotler in the industry. In fact, an MKIS is like a decision support
system (DSS): it is generally unique to the company it serves.
For the purpose of this study, the MKIS model of McLeod and Rogers is shown in Figure
41.1.
In this, there are two general subsystems which are fairly consistent with the others: they are
the input and output subsystems. The input subsystems are internal accounting, marketing
intelligence, and marketing research. They gather internal and environmental data for the
databases. The output subsystems utilise the databases to produce marketing management
information. Marketing managers will not only receive routine reports but enquires are also
made interactively to produce ad hoc reports. Through this information, marketing managers
can make their decisions on pricing, products, advertising/promotion, distribution and
packaging, under the constraints imposed by economics, the government, competitors and the
customer needs. This process should be integrated into organisational strategies and decision-
making processes to support all levels of marketing functions - planning, organising, staffing,
directing and controlling.
41.5 OBSERVATIONS
Any business should process some marketing-related information (e.g. customer addresses,
sales orders, merchandise returns, etc.). As McLeod and Rogers suggested, the perceived
MKIS support might be of such a low level that it did not seem to exist, which resulted in
losing its identity. Alternatively, managers might rely on external MKIS services for
marketing information. For the purpose of this study, the companies having no MKISs are
excluded from further analyses.
41.6 USAGE OF COMPUTERS IN MKIS
The majority of the companies that had MKISs also had company-wide computer information
systems (CISs). Of the companies with CISs, two-thirds had formal written company-wide
CIS plans, while for some, their CIS plans were influenced by marketing strategies. In
addition, most had formal written marketing plans.
Hardware Usage: MKISs are more useful, when computer assisted; for the breakdown.
Interestingly enough, little use is made of supercomputers.
Software Usage: There were three main categories of corporate-wide software (i.e. decision
modelling and spreadsheets; conventional programming and database management).
Apparently, expert systems and artificial intelligence languages are not meeting their assured
demand.
Frequency of Computer Usage: The respondents are able to access personal computers (PCs)
or terminals in their job functions. Many use PCs or terminals on a daily basis.
Purposes of Computer Usage: Earlier, the major use of computers was to retrieve data. When
asked what they first considered useful in their marketing information systems, statistics
reveal that 31per cent of the results were "reports," with 23 per cent "different managers'
information needs," and 18 per cent "data/file retrieval". Obviously, marketing managers
focus on their means (the information) and not their ends (the needs).
Communications of Information: Communications between branches and their main office
are of vital importance to the success of a marketing organisation. Traditionally, these
communications were through the phone (or voice mail). Other communication channels
included electronic mail (68 per
446
cent) and electronic bulletin boards (26 per cent).' The use of computer conferences (9 per
cent) and video conferences (10 per cent) was limited. Surprising? .wwafiWAim. uuTisca any
nypertext or hypermedia technology for their inter-branch conferences. Moreover, many of
these firms routinely routed marketing intelligence information to those managers with a need
to know.
Sources of Information: Internal accounting was regarded as the most important source of
MKIS information. This is a good sign for customers, since marketing research is, primarily,
designed to identify market demands and preferences. This seems to confirm the reviving
interest of customer-driven programmes.
Information Content: The environmental data maintained in the MIKS shows that most (93
per cent) customer data were computerised but lesser of national economy was computerised.
With regard to pre-processed information, such as sales forecasts, distribution trends, market
share, inventory statistics, etc., companies can make them available to managers on a real-
time basis. Companies can have the economic-trend estimates included in their marketing
forecasts. Many firms use corporate annual reports, sales call reports, purchase reports and
clipping services as the source of their competitor information. Nonetheless, most of these
were not computerised.
41.7 SUPPORTS FOR MARKETING MANAGEMENT
Initially, MKISs were mostly supporting middle-level management. However, more
companies thought that low-level management were receiving more MKIS support than the
top-level. The distribution has changed significantly.
Regarding management functions, planning and controlling were the two areas receiving the
most support from the MKIS - sequence: planning, controlling, directing, organising and
staffing. On the positive side, MKIS had attracted more marketing managers to use the
system for planning, but on the negative side, marketing managers may have focused too
much on planning and too little on implementation and controls.
41.8 SUPPORT FOR MARKETING MIX DECISIONS
A marketing program typically involves decisions on the marketing mix ingredients: product,
price, place and promotion. Earlier, product-related decisions were receiving the most MKIS
support. Later, support for price-related decisions took a small lead ahead of that for product
related ones. Also, product and promotion related decisions have significantly changed.
MKIS supports marketing mix decisions on a more balanced basis.
41.9 USE OF DECISION MODELS
There are several decision models available to a marketing manager. Most of them were
developed to aid in price and product decisions. Furthermore, the use of models had shown
various levels of increase in less-structured tasks such as product deletion, advertising media
selection, salesperson assignment and delivery routing. One particular task, selection of
advertising media had more than doubled in its use. On the contrary, the well-structured tasks
such as computing economic order quantities, determining reorder points and approving
customer credit had shown significant decreases in model use. The decision models, most
likely to be computer-assisted, are for formulating pricing strategy, computing operating
budget, evaluating new products and deleting products.
41.10 PERFORMANCE OF MKIS
MKIS is a group of subsystems - some gather data and others process it. The data gathering
subsystems
447
are; marketing research, marketing intelligence, an internal accounting. The processing
subsystems produce information about the product, price, distribution and promotion.
It can also be stated as a group of subsystems that gather information from the environment
and use it to help the manager answer certain basic questions. MKIS also serves as a data
bank that stores data from the environment and makes that data available to a set of computer
programs. Only few managers thought that the MKIS was "a group of subsystems - each
representing an area of marketing activity -product, price, distribution channels and
promotion." The subsystems help the manager formulate and execute marketing programmes.
41.11 RECOMMENDATIONS
The specific patterns of MKIS usage includes:
1. Computers are needed by marketing managers, for retrieving data and then storing
and processing
it.
2. Internal accounting continues to be the most important source of MKIS information
while the use
of marketing intelligence and marketing research, as information sources, are more balanced.
3. Most companies collect data about their customers. Collection of data about
competitors and
prospective customers is also popular, but this is less computerised.
4. The major users of MKIS are the middle-level managers.
5. Planning and controlling are still the management functions using most MKIS
support.
6. Price and product related decisions consume most of the MKIS resources. However,
support for
marketing mix ingredients is likely to become more balanced.
7. Decision models are used mostly for product and price decisions. Computer-assisted
decision models
reflect this.
8. Mini and microcomputers are, now, used as much as mainframe computers.
9. The computer software, being used in an MKIS, includes modelling/spreadsheets,
conventional/
third-generation programming languages and database management systems. Statistical
analysis
software, logic programming languages and expert system shells are not used very much.
41.12 ADVANTAGES OF MKIS
MKIS gives several advantages in managing information for marketing function. Some of
these are discussed:
• The MKIS framework provides a set of procedures and methods for regular, planned,
purpose-
oriented and systematic collection of data, its analysis, storage and retrieval.
• It helps in improving the data capture process, checks for reliability, consistency and
quality of
data.
• The operation of collecting, processing and transmitting data becomes smooth and the
information
flow to the decision-makers takes place in a ready for decision form.
• Provides tailor made information for specific needs.
• It facilitates repetitive use of the same information for different purposes.
• It also helps in sorting out conflicting information, which otherwise would lead to
confusion and
misdirect the decisions.
• It results in integration of information obtained from various sources regarding
different aspects. It
also helps in providing instant access to company wide information and cross-sharing of data
enabling
better service to the customer.
• It creates customer insights from routine transactional data. This helps in developing
and delivering
customer-oriented offers and building of better customer relations.
448
• It serves as a total knowledge-management mechanism. It supports capture of knowledge,
makes the knowledge flow where it is required and ensures its availability in readily usable
form.
Although many of the surveyed companies have sophisticated CISs and MKISs, most of them
are limited in nature. There seems to be a deficiency in computerising information about
governments, economy, competitors and prospects across companies. Such information
cannot be used effectively if it is not computerised. Nor can it be communicated between
branches and the main office efficiently. In today's global marketplace, the success of a
company does not depend on how much the company uses latest technologies but on how
well it can gather, manage and utilise pertinent information and integrate it into the marketing
managers' decision-making processes. To achieve a successful MKIS, implementing new
information technologies is not enough. It is necessary to focus more on the information
needs of marketing managers to balance the MKIS support for all management functions and
to integrate business plans with CIS plans in order to exploit the available information
resources. This will probably create a competitive advantage for the company and, in turn,
increase the level of satisfaction perceived by the managers.
41.13 LET US SUM UP
The marketing functions require, on a continuous basis, relevant information about various
aspects, including the marketing environment, the consumers, the competitors, various
intermediaries and the firm's market position. For collecting, collating, evaluating, analysing,
storing and disseminating the required information, a marketing information system is
required, which is well-coordinated, computer-based master plan for managing the flow of
information analysed, using the analytical tools.
The need for MKIS has become more acute due to the increased complexity of marketing
activity, information explosion need to bridge the communication gap between the producer
and the consumer as also several intermediaries and the importance of prompt decisions to
ensure an effective marketing endeavour. MIS encompasses the information on market forces,
the information on the firm's market behaviour and the internal information of the firm. To be
effective, MIS comprises four component subsystems namely internal records system,
marketing intelligence, marketing research and marketing management and science system.
A good MIS is a unified and centralised system, which is selective in information processing
and provides information regularly and quickly. It helps in systematising the information
processing and integrating the information obtained from various sources, validating its
accuracy and consistency. It provides tailor-made information to the decision-makers to meet
their specific requirements.
41.14 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS
I. Choose the correct alterative for the following statements.
(a) Firms need to collect and analyse the data pertaining to marketing for _
(i) projecting their organisation as knowledge-oriented (ii) enabling the top management to
keep control over the sales force (iii) taking the required steps for effective marketing of their
products (iv) for utilising their information technology capabilities
(b) An effective MIS fulfils these:
(i) Analysis of quantitative information (ii) Coordination among functional and specialists
executives (iii) Limited to the current scenario (iv) Both (i) and (ii) above
449
(c) The components of Marketing Information System do not include
(i) Marketing intelligence system (ii) Internal records system
(iii) Information technology system (iv) None of above
(d) The ultimate users of the Marketing Information System are
(i) the customers of the firm
(ii) the competitors of the firm (iii) the decision-makers in the firm (iv) both (i) and (ii) above
(e) Which of the following situation falls under the purview of Marketing Research
System?
(i) Riddhi Vriddhi Bank wants to send Diwali greeting cards to all its fixed deposit account
holders with deposits of Rs. 10,000 or more.
(ii) Money Honey Bank wants to have a profile of Kalahandi District to decide about opening
a new branch there.
(iii) Get Rich Fast Bank wants a comparative business statistics with other ten peer level
banks in the country.
(iv) Baroda branch of Prosperous Customer Bank is twelve-year-old and it recorded a
compounded annual growth rate of 20 per cent in deposits during the first ten years, which
has been better than the industry average. However, during the last two years the branch has
witnessed a significant decline in its deposits. Managing director of the bank desires to know
the causes for this reversal in the business trend and suggestions for ameliorating the
situation.
(f) The purpose of computer usage in MKIS is primarily to:
(i) Generate reports (ii) To meet specific user needs
(iii) Retrieval of data (iv) For day to day operations
II. State whether the following statements are True or False.
(a) Marketing information system is not concerned with the evaluation of information
collected
from either primary sources or secondary sources.
(b) The marketing information requirements of a firm are very limited and for one-time
need.
(c) Marketing information system collects and analyses the information as per the system
initially
prescribed and is not concerned with the type of information required by management.
(d) Typically, most of the information for the marketing information system is collected
from
secondary sources.
(e) Consumer is of no relevance for the marketing information system, since almost
entire
information is collected from independent sources.
III. Match the following items between column "A" and column "B"
A B
(a) Marketing Research System
(b) Marketing Intelligence System
(c) Marketing Information System
(d) Customer database
(e) Data analysis
(i) Major source - published information (ii) Database management (iii) Business information
about
customers
(iv) Data collected specifically (v) Geographic, demographic, psychographic, and
behavioural data on customers and prospects (vi) Conducting research for new theories in
marketing (vii) Adopting detective or intelligence gathering
technique on competitors (viii) Operations research tools
450
IV. State if True or False:
1. Super computers are used in MKIS.
2. Inter branch communication makes use of hypertext/hypermedia technologies.
3. MKIS deals with integration of organisation strategies and decision-making process.
41.15 ANSWERS TO CHECK YOUR PROGRESS
I. (a)-(iii), (b)-(iv), (c)-(iii), (d)-(iii), (e)-(iv), (f)-(i).
II. (a) False, (b) False, (c) False, (d) True, (e) False.
III. (a)-(iv), (b)-(ii), (c)-(i), (d)-(v), e-(viii).
IV. 1. False, 2. False, 3. True.
41.16 KEYWORDS
Marketing Information Systems, Marketing Functions, Marketing Activities, Information
Explosion, Marketing Management, Computer Usage, Decision Support, Information
Technologies, Competitive Advantage.
ABBREVIATIONS
ADR - American Depository Receipts
ALCO - Asset Liability Committee
ALM — Asset Liability Management
AMC - Asset Management Company
ATM - Automatic Teller Machine
ATS - Automatic Transfer Service
BCBS - Basel Committee for Bank Supervision
BIS - Bank for International Settlements
BPO - Business Processes Outsourcing
BRA - Banking Regulation Act
CAMELS - Capital Adequacy, Asset Quality, Management, Earnings, Liquidity & Systems
CAR - Capital Adequacy Ratio
CBN - Core Banking Network
CCIL - Clearing Corporation of India Limited
CCO - Chief Credit Officer
CD - Certificate of Deposit
CEO - Chief Executive Officer
CFO - Chief Finance Officer
CHIPS- Clearinghouse Interbank Payments System
CIF - Cost, Insurance, Freight
CMS - Cash Management Services
CRD - Cash Ratio Deposit
CRO - Chief Risk Officer
CRR - Cash Reserve Ratio
DA - Deliverable against Acceptance
DPG - Deferred Payment Guarantee
DSA - Direct Selling Agent
DSCR - Debt Service Coverage Ratio
ECB - External Commercial Borrowing
EFT - Electronic Funds Transfer
EMI - Equated Monthly Instalments
EU - European Union
FIU-IND - Financial Intelligence Unit - India
FATF - Financial Action Task Force
FDIC - Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
452
FII - Foreign Institutional Investor
FIs - Financial Institutions
FOB - Free-on-Board
GAAP - Generally Accepted Accounting Principles
GDR - Global Depository Receipts
HBO - Head of Branch Operations
HRD - Human Resources Development
HSBC - The Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation Ltd.
HUF - Hindu Undivided Family
IA - Internal Audit
IBA - Indian Banks' Association
ICAI - Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
IDBI - Industrial Development Bank of India
IFC - International Finance Corporation
IOSCO - International Organisation of Securities Commission
IPO - Initial Public Offer
IRA - Individual Retirement Accounts
IRB - Internal Rating Based
IRDA - Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority
IRS - Interest Rate Swaps
KYC - Know Your Customer
LC - Letter of Credit
LGD - Loss Given Default
LIBOR - London Interbank Offered Rate
ME - Merchant Establishments
MICR - Magnetic Ink Character Recognition
MIS - Management Information System
MMD - Money Market Deposits
MMDAs - Money Market Deposit Accounts
MODS- Multi-Option Deposit Scheme
MSME- Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise
NABARD - National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development
NACHA - National Automated Clearing House Association
NBFCs - Non-Banking Financial Companies
NDS - Negotiated Dealing System
NDTL - Net Demand and Time Liabilities
NGO - Non-Governmental Organisation
NIA - Negotiable Instruments Act
NOW - Negotiable Order of Withdrawal
NPAs - Non Performing Assets
OCT - Operation Control Terminal
OECD - Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
OFAC - Office for Foreign Assets Control
OMO - Open Market Operations
OTC - Over-The-Counter
PO - Primary Dealer
PIN - Personal Identification Number
POS - Point-of-Sales
QIBs - Qualified Institutional Borrowers
RBI - Reserve Bank of India
RCC - Risk Control and Compliance
REPO - Repurchase Agreement
RMC - Risk Management Committee
RMG - Risk Management Group
RRB - Regional Rural Bank
RTGS - Real Time Gross Settlement
SEBI - Securities and Exchange Board of India
SEBPs- Simplified Employee Benefit Plans
SLR - Statutory Liquidity Ratio
SPNS - Shared Payment Network Systems
STP - Straight Through Processing
SWIFT - The Society of Worldwide Inter-bank Financial Telecommunication
TAD - Terminal Access Device
T-Bills - Treasury Bills
TR - Treasurer
VaR - Value at Risk
455
GLOSSARY Banking Terms
4 C's of credit: The four key elements a borrower should have to obtain credit: character
(integrity), capacity (sufficient cash flow to service the obligation), capital (net worth or
owned funds), and collateral (assets to secure the debt).
acceleration clause: A provision in a loan agreement which enables a lender to recall the
entire amount of loan in case there is a default in even a single instalment payment by the
borrower.
acceptance: The contractual agreement which comes into force when the drawee of an
instrument writes "accepted" on the document and specifies a payment date. The drawee,
thereby known as the acceptor, is responsible for making the payment at maturity.
account: A record of financial transactions in the books of accounts for an asset or individual,
such as at a bank. For example, a savings account would show all deposits and withdrawals
of money by the account holder over a period.
accounts receivable: Money which is owed to a company by a customer for products and
services provided on credit. This is treated as a current asset in the company's balance sheet.
accrued expense: Is an expense that is incurred, but not yet paid for, during a given
accounting period. An example of this is wages due to workers, but not paid fully or partly
due to various reasons such as liquidity crunch or so.
accrued interest: Interest that is due on a bond or other fixed income security since the last
interest payment was made. This is an example of accrued income.
accumulated depreciation: Is the depreciation of a particular asset up to the present time. That
is, the sum total of yearly depreciation on an asset, which is carried to the balance sheet as
liability against the asset in question.
administrator: An individual appointed by a probate court to handle the estate of a person
who died intestate. They have the same duties as an executor.
affidavit: A statement written and sworn to in the presence of someone authorised to
administer an oath, such as a notary public. The document may be required for legal
purposes.
amortization: The gradual elimination of a liability, such as loan, by regular payments over a
specified period of time. Such payments must be sufficient to cover both principal and
interest. EMIs are an example of this.
appraisal: A professional opinion, usually written, of the market value of a property, such as a
home, business or other asset whose market price is not easily determined. Usually required
when a property is sold, taxed, insured or financed.
appropriation: Funds set aside for a specific purpose. For example, a debenture redemption
reserve is created for which funds are periodically set aside to facilitate repayment of the
debenture at a pre¬determined date.
APR: Annual Percentage Rate. The yearly cost of a loan, including interest, insurance, etc.,
expressed as a percentage.
456
articles of association: For a limited company, it is a document which defines relationship
between shareholders and directors and between shareholders and so on. Along with the
memorandum of association, it forms preamble for a body corporate.
asset: Any item of economic value owned by an individual or corporation, especially that
which could be converted to cash. Examples are cash, securities, accounts receivable,
inventory, equipment, real estate, a car and other property. On a balance sheet, assets are
equal to the sum of liabilities; viz., equity, preferential equity and retained earnings and loans
if any. From an accounting perspective, assets are divided into the following categories:
current assets (cash and other liquid items), long-term assets (real estate, plant, equipment),
prepaid and deferred assets (expenditures for future costs such as insurance, rent, interest)
and intangible assets (trademarks, patents, copyrights, goodwill).
asset management account: A single account at a mutual fund or bank which provides both
banking and brokerage service. Modern banking has progressed beyond mere traditional
services and provides management of assets such as securities, property.
at par: A bond or preferential equity which is selling at a price equal its face (or par) value.
Typical values of par are Rs. 100/- or Rs. 10/-. Par value is opposed to market value. Par
value is decided by the issuer of the instrument, while market value is arrived at by market
forces.
ATM: Automated teller machine, a machine at a bank branch or other location which enables
a customer to perform basic banking activities (checking one's balance, withdrawing or
transferring funds).
attachment: The act of seizing a debtor's property and placing it under a court's control. This
is in case of default in repayment of debt.
authentication: Verification that a legal document is genuine or valid, such as through a seal
from an authorised public official.
back-end load: A sales charge or commission paid when an individual sells an investment,
such as a mutual fund. It is Intended to discourage selling.
bad debt: Accounts receivable that will likely remain uncollectable and will be written off.
Bad debts appear as an expense on the company's income statement, thus reducing net
income.
bad debt reserve: Is an amount that a company sets aside to offset the estimated total of
amount that will not be repaid by creditors.
bailment: The delivery of an asset by its owner (bailer) to another person (bailee) or persons
for temporary care and safe custody. An example of this is securities kept with bank for safe
custody by customers.
balloon payment: A large, lump-sum payment scheduled at the end of a series of considerably
smaller periodic payments. A balloon payment may be included in the payment schedule for a
loan, lease or other stream of payments.
balance sheet: A quantitative summary of a company's financial condition at a specific point
in time, including assets, liabilities and net worth. The first part of a balance sheet shows all
the productive assets a company owns and the second part shows all the financing methods
(such as liabilities and shareholders' equity).
bank: An organisation, which does most or all of the following: receives demand and time
deposits, honours instruments drawn on them, pays interest on them; discounts notes, makes
loans and invests in securities; collects cheques, drafts, and notes; certifies depositor's
cheques; and issues drafts.
bancassurance: Selling of insurance through the vast network of banks. It is part of what is
today
457
bank credit: The borrowing capacity provided to an individual by the banking system in the
form of credit or a loan. The total bank credit the individual has is the sum of the borrowing
capacity each lender bank provides to the individual.
bank discount: The bank charge made for payment of a note prior to maturity, expressed as a
percentage of the note's face value. In short, front-end interest discounted on an instrument or
the amount paid to the holder/bearer of the instrument (borrower) after interest is deducted.
The full amount expressed in the instrument is collected as repayment.
bank draft: A cheque drawn by one bank against funds deposited into its account at another
bank, authorising the second bank to make payment to the individual named in the draft.
bank rate: The floor interest rate (least interest rate) charged by banks to the borrowers or the
discount rate set by a central bank or the rate at which RBI lends to member banks.
bank reconciliation: The process of adjusting balance in an account reported by a bank to
reflect transactions that have occurred since the reporting date. For instance, cheque issued by
account holder may not yet reflect in the bank's books but accounted for by the issuer. Hence,
the need to know the likely balance.
banker's acceptance: A written demand accepted by a bank to pay a specified amount at a
future date.
banking: In general terms, the business activity of accepting and safeguarding money owned
by other individuals and entities and then lending out this money in order to earn a profit.
bankrupt: A person, firm or corporation that has been declared insolvent through a court
proceeding and is relieved from the payment of debts (or allowed to do so) after the surrender
of all assets to a court-appointed trustee.
bearer: The holder of a negotiable instrument. That is, a person who is entitled to receive
payment on the instrument as a payee in a cheque.
bearer instrument: A negotiable instrument which is payable on demand to the holder,
regardless of whom it was originally issued to.
bill of exchange: An unconditional order issued by a person or business which directs the
receiver/ acceptor of the bill to pay a fixed sum of money to a third party at a future date. The
future date may be either fixed or negotiable. A bill of exchange must be in writing and
signed and dated.
bill of lading: An instrument which carries a description of goods, sent by sea as part of trade.
It is a receipt issued by the shipping company, which is ferrying the goods in question.
blank endorsement: An endorsement consisting only of a signature on the back of a cheque or
a bill of exchange. This endorsement enables subsequent holder of the cheque/bill of
exchange to be the bona fide holder.
bona fide: Any act done in good faith and is genuine.
bond: A debt instrument issued for a period of more than one year with the purpose of raising
capital by borrowing. The central and state governments, corporations and many other types
of institutions sell bonds. Generally, a bond is a promise to repay the principal along with
interest (coupons) on a specified date (maturity). Some bonds do not pay interest, but all
bonds require a repayment of principal. A bond might be sold at above or below par (the
amount paid out at maturity), but the market price will approach par value as the bond
approaches maturity since redemption or repayment of the bond is at face/par value.
book profit: Profit which has been made but not yet realised through a transaction. For
instance equity, which has risen in value but is still being held. Also called unrealised eain or
unrealised profit or paper gain or paper profit.
458
book value: The value of an asset as it appears on a balance sheet, equal to cost minus
accumulated depreciation.
bounced cheque: A cheque which a bank returns because it is not payable due to insufficient
funds in the account of the drawer of the cheque ro such other reasons.
bridge financing: Financing extended to a person, company or other entity, using existing
assets as collateral in order to acquire new assets. Bridge financing is usually short-term and
extended during the period leading up to the disbursement of the sanctioned loan.
bullion: Gold, silver, platinum, in the form of bars or ingots. Some central banks use bullion
for settlement of international debt, and some investors purchase bullion as a hedge against
inflation.
bye-laws: The official rules and regulations which govern a corporation's management. They
are drawn up at the time of incorporation or setting up.
call money market: Market in which banks and dealers borrow money to satisfy their credit
needs or their short term needs of liquidity to cover their reserve ratio requirements. The
money is returnable on call.
CAMELS: It is an assessment of member banks by RBI to ascertain the "capital adequacy,
asset quality, management, earnings appraisal, liquidity, systems and controls". It is an
assessment of the intrinsic strength of banks.
capital adequacy: Ability of a bank to provide cushion to the risk weighted assets and meet
these obligations in case they arise.
capital market: A market where debt or equity securities are traded.
capitalisation: The sum total of a corporation's long-term debt, equity and retained earnings.
cash credit: A short-term cash loan to a company to meet working capital requirements. cash
discount: A credit or discount offered if the buyer chooses to pay early and/or with cash.
cash flow statement: A summary of a company's cash flow over a given period of time. It
gives the net position of inflows and outflows of funds during the course of business.
cash reserves: Cash, money market instruments, and Treasury Bills.
central bank: The generic name given to a country's primary monetary authority, such as the
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA. Usually has responsibility for issuing currency, administering
monetary policy, holding member banks' deposits and relating the banking industry.
certificate of deposit: It is an usance promissory note issued by bank enabling the investor to
negotiate it. It is short-term surplus kept with the bank. It can be negotiated thirty days after
issue.
certificate of incorporation: Certificate issued by Registrar of Companies (ROC) that brings a
company into existence.
chequebook: A booklet of blank cheques which enable a bank account holder to draw money
from his/ her deposit account.
Clayton's rule: The first item on debit side is discharged by first item on credit side and so on
chronologi¬cally. This arises in case of default in payment or business. The rule is based
upon the simple notion of first-in, first-out to determine the effect of payments from an
account and will normally apply in the absence of evidence of any other intention. For the
banker, it is important to reconstitute the defaulter to avoid complete loss because the liability
is thus crystallised and future credits are not adjusted against old liabilities/dues.
459
clearing house: cheques drawn on all banks are collected here, their respective balances
debited/ credited and returned to the banks on whom they are drawn.
closed-end fund: A fund with a fixed number of shares outstanding and one which does not
redeem shares the way a typical mutual fund does. Closed-end funds behave more like equity
than open-end funds.
collateral: Assets pledged by a borrower to secure a loan or other credit and subject to seizure
in the event of default. Also called as security.
collecting banker: Bank which collects the negotiable instrument on behalf of its customer.
commercial bank: An institution which accepts deposits, makes business loans and offers
related services with a profit motive. Commercial banks also allow for a variety of deposit
accounts, such as current, savings and time deposit.
commercial paper: An unsecured obligation issued by a corporation or bank to finance its
short-term credit needs, such as accounts receivable and inventory. Commercial paper is
usually issued by companies with high credit ratings, meaning that the investment is almost
always of relatively low risk. These papers are bought by organisations or even high net
worth individuals on short-term basis to provide liquidity to otherwise sound companies.
commission: A fee charged by a broker or agent for his/her service in facilitating a
transaction, such as the buying or selling of securities or real estate. In the case of securities
trading, brokers can be of two broad categories depending on the commissions they charge.
Some brokers charge higher commissions, but provide research and investment advisory
services.
commitment fee: A charge by a lender for holding credit available for a borrower. Simply put,
the penalty charged for not availing credit sanctioned.
compound interest: Interest which is calculated not only on the initial principal but also the
accumulated interest of prior periods. Compound interest differs from simple interest in that
simple interest is calculated solely as a percentage of the principal sum.
consideration: Something of value, such as money or personal services, given by one party to
another in exchange for an act or promise.
contract: A binding agreement between two or more parties for performing or refraining from
performing some specified act(s) in exchange for lawful consideration.
conversion: If there is a happening inconsistent with owner's right of possession which may
be unlawful, then conversion is said to have taken place. An example is of a third party
cheque by fraudulent endorsement transferred into the customer's account. For this, a banker
needs protection u/s 131 as provided by a formal introduction of the customer to the bank.
convertible bond: A corporate bond that can be exchanged, at the option of the holder, for a
specific number of shares of the company's equity on a specified date at a pre-specified price.
Convertibility affects the performance of the bond in certain ways. Convertible bonds tend to
have lower interest rates.
corporation: The most common form of business organisation with many legal rights as an
entity separate from its owners (perpetual existence). This form of business is characterised
by the limited liability of its owners, the issuance of shares of easily transferable stock and
existence as a going concern.
coupon: The interest rate on a fixed income security, determined at the time of issuance and
expressed
460
as a percentage of par value or face value. It is called coupon since the interest cheques are
given in advance along with the bond document and appear like coupons.
credit agency: Is a company which collects information about the creditworthiness of
individuals and corporations and provides it for a fee to interested parties.
credit analysis: The process of evaluating an applicant's loan request or a corporation's debt
issue in order to determine the likelihood that the borrower will live up to his/her obligations.
credit card: Any card that may be used repeatedly to borrow money or buy products and
services on credit. Issued mostly by banks.
credit limit: The maximum amount of credit that a bank or other lender will extend to a
customer or the maximum that a credit card company will allow a card holder to borrow on a
single card.
credit rating: A published ranking, based on detailed financial analysis by a credit bureau, of
one's financial history, specifically as it relates to one's ability to meet debt obligations.
credit risk: The possibility that a bond issuer/borrower will default, by failing to repay
principal and interest in a timely manner. Sovereign bonds issued by the government for the
most part, are immune from default (if the government needs money it can just print more).
Bond, issued by corporations are more likely to be defaulted on, since companies could go
bankrupt. Quasi govt. bodies occasionally default as well although it is much less common.
Also called default risk.
creditor: A person or organisation which extends credit to others.
creditworthiness: A creditor's measure of an individual's or company's ability to meet debt
obligations.
crossed cheque: A form of cheque which has two parallel or transverse lines across the face
so that the bank on which it is drawn may not pay to any other party than to a bank where the
payee has an account.
current account: A deposit account at a bank which does not pay interest but can be
withdrawn any time. It is basically for operating a business.
custodian: is an organisation, which holds in custody and safekeeping the securities and other
assets of another organisation or individual.
DA bills: They are bills which have a usance period and require acceptance by the drawee.
DP bills: They are bills where delivery of goods is against payment by the drawee.
debenture: Debt mostly unsecured backed only by the integrity of the borrower, not by
collateral, and documented by an agreement. One example is an unsecured bond.
debit card: A card which allows customers to access their funds immediately, electronically.
Unlike a credit card, a debit card does not have any float.
debt: An amount owed to a person or organisation for funds borrowed. Debt can be
represented by a pro-note, bond, mortgage or other form stating repayment terms and, if
applicable, interest requirements. These different forms all imply intent to pay back an
amount owed by a specific date, which is set forth in the repayment terms.
debt financing: Financing by selling bonds, bills or notes to individuals or institutions.
debt instrument: A written promise to repay a debt. Examples include bills, bonds, notes,
CDs, commercial paper and banker's acceptances/ L/Cs.
debt market: The market for trading debt instruments.
debt/equity ratio: A measure of a company's financial leverage. Debt/ equity ratio is equal to
long-term debt divided by shareholders' equity. Typically, the data from the prior fiscal year is
used in the
461
calculation. Investing in a company with a higher debt/equity ratio may be riskier, especially
in times of rising interest rates, due to the additional interest that has to be paid out for the
debt.
debtor: An individual or company that owes debt to another individual or company (the
creditor), as a result of borrowing or issuing bonds.
deed of trust: A deed in which title is conveyed to a trustee.
default: Failure to make required debt payments on a timely basis or to comply with other
conditions of an obligation or agreement.
deferred credit: Revenue received by a firm but not yet reported as income.
deferred payment: A debt which has been incurred and will be paid back at some point in the
future.
demand deposit: An account balance which can be drawn upon on demand, i.e. without prior
notice. Savings deposit is an example.
depreciation: Is the decrease in the value of equipment from wear and tear and the passage of
time. It is notional charge/debit to the profit and loss a/c, which helps build cash reserves for
replacement of existing assets at a future date.
derivative: A financial instrument whose characteristics and value depend upon the
characteristics and value of an underlying commodity, bond, equity or currency. Examples of
derivatives include futures and options. Investors sometimes purchase or sell derivatives to
manage the risk associated with the underlying security, to protect against fluctuations in
value or to profit from periods of inactivity or decline. These techniques can be quite
complicated and risky.
discharge: To satisfy or dismiss the obligation of a debt. Simply put, it is the full repayment
of a debt or an obligation.
disclosure: The release of relevant information.
dishonor: To not pay, such as for a bounced cheque. It is also failure to meet/pay legitimate
demand raised by a bill of exchange made in normal trade.
dissolution: The end of the legal existence of a corporation, by shareholder vote, acquisition
by another corporation or order of a legal authority.
dividend: A taxable payment declared by a company's board of directors and given to its
shareholders, usually annually, out of the company's current or retained earnings. Dividends
are normally given as cash (cash dividend). It is the shareholders' earning on his investment
in the company.
drawee: The party directed to pay the amount of a draft or cheque or a bill of exchange.
drawer: The party who draws the draft, cheque or bill of exchange upon another party for
payment.
due date: Date on which an obligation must be paid.
effective annual interest rate: The actual annual interest rate that accrues, after taking into
consideration the effects of compounding (when compounding occurs more than once per
year).
electronic funds transfer (EFT): Any transfer of funds that is initiated by electronic means,
such as an electronic terminal, telephone, computer, ATM or magnetic tape.
encumbered: Owned by one entity but subject to another person's valid claim. endorsement:
A signature used to legally transfer a negotiable instrument.
equity: Ownership interest in a corporation in the form of equity capital. It also refers to total
assets minus total liabilities, in which case, it is also referred to as shareholder's equity or net
worth or book
462
value. Simply put, it is the money brought in by the owners/shareholders and over time could
also include accumulated profits.
equated monthly instalment (EMI): An equal amount repaid periodically comprising of
interest and principal over the period of the loan or debt. The composition of interest
(declining) and instalment of principal (increasing) changes, while the amount remains the
same.
escrow account: A trust account held in the borrower's name to repay obligations such as
borrowing. Credits to the account are first appropriated to discharge the borrower's liability.
exchange: Any organisation, association or group which provides or maintains a market place
where securities, options, futures or commodities can be traded.
executor: An individual or institution nominated in a will and appointed by a court to settle
the estate of a deceased.
export-import Bank: An independent bank which encourages exports by providing credit and
insurance. Also called Eximbank.
face value: The nominal amount assigned to a security by the issuer. For an equity security,
face value is usually a very small amount that bears no relationship to its market price. For a
debt security, face value is the amount repaid to the investor when the bond matures. In the
secondary market, a bond's price fluctuates with interest rates. If interest rates are higher than
the coupon rate on a bond, the bond will be sold below face value (at a "discount"). If interest
rates have fallen, the bond, will be sold above face value.
factor: A firm engaged in the business of financing accounts receivable, an activity known as
factoring. The firm so buying the receivables become the creditors to the receivables. This
helps the liquidity of the selling entity.
factoring: The selling of a company's accounts receivable, at a discount, to a factor, who then
assumes the credit risk of the account debtors and receives cash as the debtors settle their
accounts. Also called accounts receivable financing.
financial institution: Institution which collects funds from the public and places them in
financial assets, such as deposits, loans and bonds, rather than tangible property.
floating rate: Any interest rate that changes on a periodic basis. The change, usually tied to
movement of an outside indicator, such as the prime interest rate. Movement above or below
certain levels is often prevented by a predetermined floor and ceiling for a given rate. For an
individual taking out a loan when rates are low, a fixed rate loan would allow him or her to
"lock in" the low rates and not be concerned with fluctuations. On the other hand, if interest
rates were historically high at the time of the loan, he or she would benefit from a floating
rate loan, because as the prime rate falls to historically normal levels, the rate on the loan
would decrease.
forfeiture: A loss of money, property or privileges due to a breach of legal obligation, which
serves as compensation for resulting losses. An example is of equity shares issued on part
payment basis. When the calls for payment of the balance is not heeded then the amount
initially paid is forfeited or lost by the prospective investor and the shares are said to be
forfeited.
front-end load: A charge paid when an individual buys an investment, such as a mutual fund.
The load is clubbed with the first payment made by an investor, so the total initial payment is
higher than the later payments. The purpose of a load is to cover administrative expenses and
transaction costs at the beginning.
garnishee order: Monetary judgement by the court against defendant by ordering third party
(garnishee) to pay money owed by the defendant (judgement debtor) to the plaintiff
(judgement creditor). This is so when there is default in debt repayment.
463
general lien: A lien applied to all goods, not just the goods giving rise to the debt, owned by
the borrower.
government securities: Securities issued by a government to raise the funds necessary to pay
for expenses/investments.
guarantee: To accept responsibility for an obligation if the entity with primary responsibility
for the obligation does not meet it. That is the guarantor pays when the debtor fails to do so.
guarantor: One who guarantees an obligation and has a legal duty to fulfil it.
hedging: Protecting assets from currency fluctuations. This is generally done by taking
positions or doing things, which will offset the adverse effects on the original investment. For
instance, a weak rupee leads to the purchase of shares of the export oriented companies, who
will benefit from a falling rupee. This will provide a hedge against fall in value of other
assets, if at all.
holder in due course: is a person who is in possession of an instrument for which
consideration has been paid and who believes that there is no defect in the title.
hybrid debt: Instruments which are similar to equity, which absorb losses without
forcing/causing liquidation.
hypothecation: The pledging of securities or other assets as collateral to secure a loan. The act
of pledging is often without transfer of goods, as in funding of inventory of raw
materials/finished goods. There is charge on the inventory whose value at any point in time
not fall below the amount specified by the bank. The working capital cycle will ensure
healthy movement of goods.
inactive account: A bank account in which there have not been any transactions for an
extended period of time. Such accounts are often charged a fee if there are no operations.
initial public offering: IPO; the first sale of shares by a company to the public. insolvent:
Unable to meet debt obligations. Opposite of solvent.
interest cover: A company's pre tax operating income (or occasionally, cash flow) divided by
its interest obligations, for a given period. Mathematically, it is the ratio of earnings before
interest, tax and depreciation divided by the amount of interest payable. A ratio of 1.5 to 2 per
cent is considered ideal by lending institutions.
interest rate: A rate which is charged or paid for the use of money. An interest rate is
expressed as an annual percentage of the principal.
Internal Rate of Return (IRR): The rate of return that would make the present value of future
cash flows of an investment or business opportunity plus the terminal value of the business
equal the current market price of the investment or opportunity. Simply put, it is the discount
rate, which makes the current investment in a business equal to the present value of future
cash flows arising out of the business plus the terminal value of the business, i.e. the NPV of
the business equals zero.
introduction: Introduction of a potential customer to a bank by an account holder, employee
or a well known person. It is necessary for a bank seeking protection under Sec. 131 of the
N.I. Act. This formality is necessary for opening of accounts.
irrevocable: Not able to be undone. There are certain terms in a negotiable instrument or a
legal document or a document whose tenor cannot be overlooked/avoided/bypassed and have
to be adhered to.
joint account: Any account owned by two or more people.
joint and several liability: An obligation for which multiple individuals are liable for payment
as in case of obligations of a partnership concern.
464
judgement creditor: Under garnishee order, the creditor or person to receive its benefit is
called so. judgement debtor: Under garnishee order the debtor or the person liable to the
creditor is called so.
Law of limitation: Law that sets out a period after which a legal document cannot be enforced
unless revalidated before the said date.
lease: A contractual arrangement whereby the lessor grants the lessee the right to use his asset
for a fixed period in return for periodic (lease) rentals.
ledger: A book/folder/file of accounting entries where transactions are listed in separate
accounts.
lender of last resort: A function of a central bank, such as the Reserve bank, in which it lends
money to a bank which is facing unusually heavy withdrawals.
lessee: A person who obtains a property on lease from its owner.
lessor: An owner of property who rents it to another party.
letter of credit (L/C): A binding document that a buyer can request from his bank in order to
guarantee that the payment for goods will be transferred to the seller. Basically, a letter of
credit gives the seller reassurance that he will receive the payment for the goods. In order for
the payment to occur, the seller has to present the bank with the necessary documents.
leverage: Is the amount of long term debt relative to equity with a higher ratio meaning a
greater amount of leverage. A business entity's funding pattern generally is a judicious mix of
equity and debt. Loosely speaking, it represents the influence one financial variable has over
some other related financial variable.
liability: It is a claim on the assets of a business. It is the amount owed by the business to the
shareholders, both preferential and equity, creditors both long term (banks and institutions)
and short term.
LIBOR: It is the London Interbank offering rate. It is the standard for international
transactions by Indian entities.
lien: A legal claim against an asset which is used to secure a loan and which must be paid
when the asset is sold. Liens can be structured in many different ways. In some cases, the
creditor will have legal claim against an asset, while not actually holding it in possession and
in other cases, the creditor will actually hold on to the asset until the debt is paid of.
lien, banker's: Banker's lien gives it a right of sale on possession of goods in the event of
failure of the debtor to meet the obligation. Banker's lien is an implied pledge.
lien, negative: In which borrowers undertake that the assets are free from any charge and that
no charge will be created without bankers prior consent. The first right of charge lies with
bank.
liquidate: To convert an asset to cash. Or
to sell off an entity to meet legal obligation.
liquidity ratio: Total value of cash and marketable assets (receivables and easily realisable)
divided by current liabilities. For a bank, this is the cash held by the bank as a proportion of
deposits in the bank. The liquidity ratio measures the extent to which a corporation or other
entity can quickly liquidate assets and cover short-term liabilities and therefore is of
interest/concern to short-term creditors.
long-term debt: Loans and obligations with a maturity of longer than one year; accompanied
by interest payments.
mandate: Power given to a person or group of persons for carrying out certain
jobs/activities/obligations.
465
margin: Margin refers to an amount required to be brought in by a borrower, as specified by
the lender, as his own contribution (equity) to the business.
market value: A security's last reported sale price on an exchange.
OR
The market price of an entire company calculated by multiplying the number of shares
outstanding, by
the price per share. This is also called market cap or market capitalisation.
marketable security: Security that probably could be converted into cash quickly and easily.
material alteration: Any alteration that changes the tenor of an instrument. To validate a
material alteration, the drawer must authenticate.
maturity date: The date on which a debt becomes due for payment.
memorandum of association: Document which governs the association of a company with the
outside world; gives details of the type of company, objects of the company (activities the
company may carry out), capital structure, etc.
moratorium: A period of time during which a certain activity is not allowed or required. For
instance, when repayment on a loan starts only after a lapse of a certain period after its
disbursement, then that period is called the moratorium on the loan.
mortgage: A loan to finance the purchase of real estate or plant and machinery, usually with
specified payment periods and interest rates. The borrower (mortgagor) gives the lender
(mortgagee) a lien on the property as collateral for the loan.
NAV: Net Asset Value. The value in rupees of a single mutual fund share based on the value
of the underlying assets of the fund minus its liabilities/expenses, divided by the number of
shares outstanding. Calculated at the end of each business day.
negligence: Failure to act during the normal course of business in an usually accepted
manner.
negotiable instrument: A transferable, signed document that promises to pay the bearer a sum
of money at a future date or on demand. Examples include cheques, bills of exchange and
promissory notes.
net present value; NPV: A method of evaluating investment proposals. It is the present value
of future cash flows less the sunk costs (initial investment). When evaluating two proposals,
the assumption is that the one with higher NPV is the better of the two. Sometimes a
comparative ratio of the NPVs to the initial investment is also used for the purpose.
net worth: For a company, it is total assets minus total outside liabilities. Net worth is an
important determinant of the value of a company, considering it is composed primarily of all
the money that has been invested since its inception, as well as the retained earnings for the
duration of its operation. Net worth can be used to determine creditworthiness because it
gives a snapshot of the company's investment history. Also called owner's equity,
shareholders' equity, or net assets.
Non performing asset: A loan that is not meeting its stated principal and interest payments.
More generally an asset that is not producing Income.
non-recourse debt: Debt for which the borrower is not personally liable.
nostro account: A banking term to describe an account one bank holds with a bank in a
foreign country, usually in the currency of that foreign country.
notary public: A person authorized by the state to notarize certain documents,
online banking: A svstem allowing individuals to perform banking activities at home, via the
internet.
466
operating cycle: The average time between purchasing or acquiring inventory and receiving
cash proceeds from its sale in finished goods form. Also called working capital cycle in
which the period covers the time from purchase of raw materials, its conversion to final
goods, subsequent sale and realisation of the proceeds.
opportunity cost: It is the rate of return that can be earned on the best alternative investment.
order nisi: To freeze all transactions in a debtors' account and use the amount to payoff the
judgement debt.
overdraft: The amount by which withdrawals exceed deposits or the extension of credit by a
lending institution to allow for such a situation.
passbook: Book issued by a bank to record deposits, withdrawals and interest earned in a
deposit account.
payee: One who receives a payment, such as through cash, cheque, money order: bill of
exchange, etc. paying banker: Bank on whom the negotiable instrument is drawn and which
is sent for collection.
personal guarantee: Promise made by an entrepreneur which obligates him/her to personally
repay debts his/her corporation defaults on.
personal identification number (PIN): Code used by an individual so that he/she can access
his/her bank account at an ATM machine.
pledging: Offering assets to a lender as collateral for a loan. Though the asset will be pledged
and may be in the custody of the lender, it is still owned by the borrower unless he/she
defaults on the loan.
post-date: To put a future date on a document or cheque, postponing the effective or
negotiable date.
power of attorney: A legal document that enables an individual to designate another person
called the attorney, in fact, to act on his/her behalf as long as the individual does not become
disabled or incapacitated.
preamble: It is an introductory statement, a preliminary explanation. It tells about the rules
governing a body, which form the basis for their existence and future action.
preferential shares: Shares on which a specific dividend is paid before any dividends are paid
to equity shareholders, and which takes precedence over equity in the event of a liquidation.
Preferential shareholders do not enjoy any of the voting rights of equity shareholders.
prime rate: The interest rate that commercial banks charge their most creditworthy borrowers,
such as large corporations. The prime rate is a lagging indicator. Also, called prime.
probate: The review or testing of a will before a court of law to ensure that the will is
authentic.
profit and loss statement: An official quarterly or annual financial document published by a
public company, showing earnings, expenses and net profit. Net income is determined from
this financial report by subtracting total expenses from total revenue. The profit and loss
statement and the balance sheet are the two major financial reports that every company
publishes. The difference between this statement and the balance sheet deals with the periods
of time that each one represents. The profit and loss statement shows transactions over a
given period (usually quarterly or annually), whereas the balance sheet gives holdings on a
specific date.
promissory note: a promise by the drawer of the note to pay a certain sum of money on
certain date to the drawee.
prospectus: Description of a company, raising funds from the capital market, to the
prospective investors.
467
prudential limits: Limits of sector wise credit exposure set by RBI on commercial banks.
These limits helps control, among other things too much exposure to a particular sector vis-a-
vis others as also the effects of artificial prices, demand-supply mismatches, default situations
and so on.
reconciliation: Adjusting one's cheque/cash book balance to match a bank statement.
redemption: The return of an investor's principal amount in a security, such as a bond,
debenture or mutual fund shares, at or prior to maturity.
remit: To make a payment by transfer. Examples of remittance include cash, cheque/draft and
electronic transfer.
reserve ratio: Amount of money and liquid assets that the member banks must hold in gilt
securities or cash with the RBI, usually a specified percentage of their demand deposits and
time deposits. Also called reserve requirement.
resolution: An official document representing an action on the part of the board of directors
of a corporation. For instance, a board may resolve to borrow funds from or place deposits in
a bank and may appoint certain directors or officials to operate the bank account.
retail banking: Banking services for individual customers.
retained earnings: Earnings not paid out as dividends but instead reinvested in the core
business or used to payoff debt.
revaluation reserves: Reserves that are created after revaluation of assets that are under
valued in the books of accounts. An example is of an asset, which commands a market price
well above the book value (after depreciation) such as land and therefore the company
decides to increase its value in the books and create a reserve (notional).
revolving line of credit: An agreement by a bank to lend a specific amount to a borrower and
to allow that amount to be borrowed again once it has been repaid. Also called revolving
credit.
right of recourse: The right to recover a bad debt.
Sans recourse: without liability to the endorser. The liability is solely that of the
drawee/acceptor.
savings deposits: Accounts that pay interest and can be withdrawn on demand, offered by
banks.
secondary market: A market in which an investor purchases a security from another investor
rather than the issuer, subsequent to the original issuance in the primary market. It is a place
where buyers and sellers of a security meet to deal/operate.
secured debt: Backed by a pledge of collateral/assets. Opposite of unsecured.
secured loan: A loan which is backed by assets belonging to the borrower in order to decrease
the risk assumed by the lender. The assets may be forfeited to the lender if the borrower fails
to make the necessary payments.
securitisation: The process of aggregating similar instruments, such as loans or mortgages
into a negotiable/tradable security.
set-off: Adjusting debit in one account of a borrower with credit in another.
simple interest: The interest calculated on a principal sum, not compounded on earned
interest.
sinking fund: A fund into which a company sets aside money over time, in order to retire its
preferential shares, bonds or debentures.
statutory: Something which is enacted by legislation. As a law perhaps.
468
stop payment: An order to a bank not to honour the payment of a cheque after it has been
delivered but before it has been cashed.
subordinated debt: Debt that is either unsecured or has a lower priority than that of another
debt claim on the same asset or property. Also called a junior debt.
surety: A pledge, guarantee or bond, usually to back the performance of an individual or
company.
swap: An exchange of streams of payments over time according to specified terms. Also an
exchange of loan portfolio by banks.
tangible asset: Assets having a physical existence, such as cash, equipment and real estate;
accounts receivable are also usually considered tangible assets for accounting purposes.
Opposite of intangible asset.
tenor: instructions appearing on the face of a negotiable instrument such as date, amount,
name of payee and so on.
terminal value: It is the value of an asset at some point in time in future. It is a notional value
assigned, while estimating the future cash flows of a business but is essential nevertheless.
third party: Someone other than the principals directly involved in a transaction or agreement.
time deposit: money kept as deposit in a financial institution, usually a bank, for a fixed term
or with the understanding that the customer can withdraw only by giving advanced notice.
transfer: A movement of funds from one account to another.
traveller's cheque: Cheque issued by a financial institution which functions as cash but is
protected against loss or theft. Traveller's checks are useful when travelling, especially in case
of overseas travel when not all credit and debit cards carried by a person will be accepted. A
charge or a commission, is usually incurred when a person exchanges cash for traveller's
checks, though some issuers provide them free of charge.
treasury Bill: A negotiable debt obligation issued by the government and backed by its full
faith and credit, having a short maturity. Also called the "T-Bill". These instruments, liquid in
nature, are a source for meeting the central bank's (RBI) reserve ratios.
trust: A legal arrangement in which an individual gives fiduciary control of property to a
person or institution (the trustee) for the benefit of beneficiaries.
underwrite: To assume risk, as when offering a policy or bringing a corporation's new
securities issue to the public; in the latter case, the term originally applied only to firm
commitment offerings, but is now used for all offerings. To put it simply if the IPO is
undersubscribed the underwriter subscribes to the extent of his commitment for a
fee/commission which is payable in all situations.
usance: The length of time allowed for the payment of a bill of exchange.
variable rate: Any interest rate or dividend that changes on a periodic basis. Variable rates, are
often used for convertibles, mortgages, and certain other kinds of loans. The change, is
usually tied to movement of an outside indicator, such as the prime interest rate. Movement
above or below certain levels is often prevented by a predetermined floor and ceiling for a
given rate. Also called the adjustable rate.
vicarious liability: Liability that arises out of the responsibility of a superior for the acts of his
subordinate. As in case of a bank which is liable to the acts of its employees in the natural
discharge of duties.
waiver: The act of voluntarily giving up a right or covenant. Covenants are certain clauses in
an agreement.
469
warrant: A certificate, usually issued by a corporation along with a bond or debenture,
entitling the holder to buy a specific amount of securities of that corporation at a specific
price, usually above the prevailing market price at the time of issuance. In case the price of
the security rises to above that of the warrant's exercise (entitled) price, then the investor can
buy the security at the warrant's exercise price and resell it for a profit. Otherwise, the
warrant may simply expire or remain unused.
wholesale banking: Banking services for institutions.
wire transfer: An electronic transfer of funds.
withdrawal: A removal of funds from an account.
working capital: Is current assets minus current liabilities. Working capital measures how
much liquid assets a company has to build its business. The number can be positive or
negative, depending on how much debt the company is carrying. In general, companies that
have a lot of working capital will be more successful since they can expand and improve their
operations. Companies with negative working capital may lack the funds necessary for
growth.
working capital loan: A short-term loan which provides money to buy earning assets.
write-off: To charge an asset amount to expense or loss, in order to reduce the value of that
asset and one's earnings. An example is of receivables not being recoverable charged to the
profit and loss account in order to offset the income that has already accrued to the account.
written down value method: It is a method of calculation by which depreciation is charged as
a percentage of the net asset value (written down value) in the books year after year.
GLOSSARY Marketing Terms
advertising: The placement and purchase of announcements and persuasive messages in time
or space in any of the mass media by business firms. It can also be defined as any paid form
of non-personal presentation and promotion, of ideas, goods or services, by an identified
sponsor.
analysis: In marketing and other social science disciplines, a variety of statistical and non-
statistical methods are used to analyse data, instead of sheer intuition or simple descriptive
statistics.
attitude: The degree of enthusiasm for a product which can be classified into enthusiastic,
positive, indifferent, negative and hostile.
audience: The number and/or characteristics of the persons or households who are exposed to
a particular type of advertising media or media vehicle.
brand: A name, term, design, symbol or any other feature that identifies one seller's goods or
service as distinct from those of other sellers. The legal term for brand is trademark. A brand
may identify one item, a family of items or all items of that seller. If used for the firm as a
whole, the preferred term is trade name.
brand equity: The positive differential value given to product with a strong brand, by the
consumer. For instance, "thanda means Coca Cola".
census: A complete canvas of a population.
channel of distribution: An organised network of agencies and institutions which, in
combination, perform all the functions required to link producers with end customers to
accomplish the marketing task.
circulation: The number of copies of a print advertising medium that are distributed.
competition: The rivalry among sellers trying to achieve such goals as increasing profits,
market share and sales volume by varying the elements of the marketing mix: price, product,
distribution and promotion.
consumer: The ultimate user of goods, ideas or services. Also, the buyer or decision-maker,
for example, the parent selecting children's books is the consumer.
consumer behaviour: The behaviour of the consumer or decision-maker in the market place of
products and services.
consumer characteristics: The demographic, lifestyle and personality characteristics of the
consumer.
consumer satisfaction: The degree to which a consumer's expectations are fulfilled or
surpassed by a product.
customer: The actual or prospective purchaser of products or services.
demand: The number of units of a product sold in a market over a period of time.
demographic analysis: A detailed analysis of the prospective market for the product after
segmentation based on various characteristics of the population essential for the product in
question.
direct marketing: Marketing efforts, in total, directed toward a specific targeted group - direct
selling,
472
distribution: The marketing and carrying of products to customers.
diversification: Moving into attractive opportunities outside the existing business.
environmental analysis: Gathering data regarding political, cultural, social, demographic,
economic, legal, international and ecological forces, identifying trends affecting businesses.
focus group: A method of gathering quantitative data on the preferences and beliefs of
consumers through group interaction and discussion usually focused on a specific topic or
product.
goals: A concrete point of measurement that the business unit intends to meet to achieve
objectives.
goods: A product that has tangible form in contrast to services that are intangible.
hybrid: Mix of products or services making for an unusual whole.
heterogenous: A mix of different types of products or services.
inventory management: Management of goods on hand in terms of holding, selling, and so
on.
knowledge: Consumers' meanings or beliefs about products, brands, stores that are stored in
memory.
label: An important element of a product which identifies and describes it.
market: The set of actual or potential users/customers.
market area: A geographical area containing the customers/users of a particular company for
specific goods or services.
market demand: The total volume of a product or service bought/used by a specific groups of
customers/ users in a specified market area during a specified period.
market development: Expanding the total market served, by - (1) entering new segments, (2)
converting non-users, (3) increasing use by present users.
market positioning: Positioning refers to the user's perceptions of the place a product or brand
occupies in' a market segment or how the company offering is differentiated from the
competitors.
market profile: A breakdown of a facility's market area according to income, demography and
lifestyle.
market research: The systematic gathering, recording and analysing of data with respect to a
particular market, where market refers to a specific user group in a specific geographic area.
market segmentation: The process of subdividing a market into distinct subsets of users that
behave in the same way or have similar needs for the product/service.
market share: A proportion of the total sales/use in a market obtained by a given facility or
chain of the product/service in question.
marketing: The process of planning and executing the conception, pricing, promotion, and
distribution of ideas, goods and services to create exchanges that satisfy individual and
organisational goals. In short, it is much more than mere selling.
marketing channel: A set of institutions necessary to transfer the title to goods and to move
goods to the point of consumption.
marketing mix: The mix of controllable variables that the company uses to reach desired
use/sales level in target market, including price, product, place and promotion-4 Ps.
marketing opportunity: An attractive arena of relevant marketing action in which a particular
organisation is likely to enjoy a superior and competitive advantage.
marketing plan: A document composed of an analysis of the current marketing situation,
opportunities and threats, analysis, marketing objectives, marketing strategy, action programs
and projected income statement.
473
motivation: The positive or negative needs, goals, desires and forces that impel an individual
toward or away from certain actions, activities, objects or conditions. The inner needs and
wants of an individual is what affects behaviour.
objectives: The desired or needed result to be achieved by a specific time. An objective is
broader than a goal and one objective can be broken down into a number of specific goals.
observation: A method of data collection in which the situation of interest is watched and the
relevant facts, actions and behaviours are recorded.
packaging: A convenient container for a product which is suitable and provides information
relating to the product.
penetrated market: Set of users actually consuming the product/service.
perception: Perception is the cognitive impression that is formed of "reality" which in turn
influences the individual's actions and behaviour toward that object. Simply speaking, it is the
market's understanding of the product.
perishable: Low shelf life.
personal selling: Oral presentation in a conversation with one or more prospective purchasers
for the purpose of making sales.
place: In the channels of distribution, the physical facilities, point of location.
potential market: Set of users who profess some level of interest in a designed market offer.
price: The formal ratio that indicates the quantities of money, goods or services needed to
acquire a given quantity of goods or services. All goods and services have a value and this
reflects in their price generally fixed by market forces.
pricing:
- mark-up: Price determined by adding a mark-up to the costs.
- target return: Pricing based on required return on investment.
- perceived value: Price based on buyer's perception.
- going rate pricing: Price based on the competitors' prices.
- market penetration: Price is lower initially to generate volume sales.
- discriminatory: Different prices for different buyers.
product: A bundle of attributes or features, functions, benefits and uses capable of exchange,
usually in tangible (money) or intangible forms.
product life cycle: The four stages products go through from birth to death: introductory,
growth, maturity and decline.
- introduction stage of product life cycle: Period of low sales and growth.
- growth state of product life cycle: Second stage during which sales/use are increasing.
- maturity stage of product life cycle: Initial rapid growth is over and use and/or sales
level peaks
off.
- decline stage of product life cycle: The last stage in the life cycle when the product
loses its
marketability.
product mix: The full set of products offered by an organisation.
product positioning: it is the act of designing the company's offer and image so that the target
market understands and appreciates what the company stands for in relation to its
competitors. This can be manipulated by the organisation.
474
promotion: The various communication techniques such as advertising, personal selling, sales
promotion and public relations/product publicity available to the marketer to achieve specific
goals.
public opinion: The consensus view of a population on a topic.
public policy: A course of action pursued by the government pertaining to people as a whole
on which laws rest.
public relations: The form of communication management that seeks to make use of publicity
and other non-paid forms of promotion and information to influence feelings, opinions or
beliefs about the company and its offerings.
public sector: Those marketing activities that are carried out by government agencies for
public service rather than for profit.
reach: The number of people or households exposed to a particular advertising media or
media schedule during a specified time.
response: The set of reactions that the receiver has after being exposed to the message.
sales promotion: Campaign to encourage sales or purchase of goods and services by offering
short-term incentives such lower prices or buy 1 take 2.
sample: The selection of a subset of elements from a larger group of objects. For instance,
schoolgoing children from a locality would represent a sample for survey relating to
education.
sample survey: A cross-sectional study in which the sample is selected to be representative of
the target population and in which the emphasis is on the generation of summary statistics
such as averages and percentages.
service(s): Products such as a bank loan that are intangible or at least substantially so.
servuction: When production and consumption take place simultaneously. The consumer and
service provider interact during the service experience.
strategic thrust: A well thought out foray into the market.
target market: The particular segment of a total population on which the retailer focuses its
merchandising expertise to satisfy that sub-market in order to accomplish its profit objectives.
tangible goods: Goods easily identifiable as opposed to service.
target market identification: The process of using income, demographic and life style
characteristics of a market and census information for small areas to identify the most
favourable locations for placing a product.
warehouse: A unit where goods are stored before sending to distribution centres.
word of mouth (WOM) communication: This occurs when people share information about
products or promotions with friends — research indicates WOM is more likely to be
negative.
GLOSSARY Information Technology
algorithm: A step-by-step method of accomplishing a task. A series of mathematical
commands, that cipher and decipher.
batch: A group of commands that are executed one at a time.
batch File: A file in a DOS/Windows environment with the .bat extension. This file type is
executable in DOS or at a Windows command prompt. Batch programs are written in a batch
programming language that utilises a superset of standard DOS commands.
buffer: A temporary location to store or group information in hardware or software. Buffers
are used whenever data is received in sizes that may be different than the ideal size for the
hardware or software that uses the buffer.
buffered memory: Memory modules that have extra chips on them to support Error Checking
and Correcting (ECC) functionality.
bug: This is commonly an error in design or programming in a hardware device or piece of
software.
bus topology: This network topology has computers connected to a strand of network cabling
that is connected to network repeaters at one end and terminated at the other.
cable modem: The device that you attach a coaxial cable from your cable company directly
into that can provide you with high speed Internet access.
channel: It consists of controller card, interface cable and power supply.
cheque truncation: It stops the flow of cheques through the banking system and converts it
into an electronic processing system.
coaxial cable: It consists of a single copper wire, surrounded by a copper braid or foil that
acts as a ground. The entire wire is coated with insulation. The cable carries digital signals at
high speeds.
data-information: Any series of bits, characters or objects that has meaning. Data is stored
and transmitted by computers.
data compression: Takes something large and makes it smaller.
data encryption standard (DES): An encryption method developed by IBM in 1977. It uses a
private 56-bit key that is applied to each 64-bit block of data.
data mining: The act of analysing a database or data warehouse and searching for new facts
based on the data.
database: An ordered set of data.
digital signature: A form of electronic signature that works with a public and private key
encryption system and a certificate authority.
disk mirroring: Disk mirroring involves two hard drives that are on the same drive controller.
The same data is written to both drives over the same channel.
disk duplexing: Disk duplexing is much like disk mirroring, but each drive is on a separate
controller. dumb terminal: These are hooked up to mainframes and are little more than a
monitor attached to a
476
keyboard. All they are good for is running programs using the mainframe's hard drive and
memory, thus the "dumb" in the name.
dynamic signature verification: It finds out whether a signature is genuine or not.
e-mail: This stands for electronic mail. It is a service provided over the Internet that allows
you to send information to another person or list of people.
electronic purse: The space in a card is used to store different types of accounts of a user.
electronic signature: Any form of electronic identifier, including a digital signature.
encryption: The act of altering data to make it unreadable unless you know how to decrypt it.
ethernet: A network topology that is able to send data at 10 Mbits/second. Workstations can
exist on the same cable, but only one can communicate at a time. To get by these limitations,
switched Ethernet and Fast Ethernet were invented and were also combined. Nowadays, most
networking devices are switched fast Ethernet.
FTP (file transfer protocol): A common method of moving files, from system to system, by
using TCP/IP. To work properly, it requires an FTP client to contact an FTP server in order to
transmit data back and forth.
fault tolerant computer system: The ability of a system to continue operations following
failure in one or more components.
full duplex: Originally this referred to a communication between a modem and a remote
system, where characters were sent both ways over the phone line so that they could be
accurately displayed on a terminal.
gopher: This is often said to be the first incarnation of the World Wide Web. It is an
information source based on textual links, now outdated and superseded by the Web.
graphical user interface (GUI): Any system that uses graphics to represent the functions of a
program. All Windows operating systems are GUIs.
half duplex: Originally a modem communications term, half duplex now mainly refers to
network communications that transmit in one direction at a time. Also, see duplex and full
duplex.
host: A generic term used to describe a computer or program that makes a resource available,
usually over a network.
internet: Global network of networks. It is system that allows user computers to exchange
data, messages, etc.
LAN: A small and an isolated network at one office or physical location. Most office
computers are connected to a LAN, but may also be connected to the Internet or a WAN.
management information systems/services (MIS): The department at most companies that
provides real-time information to the management.
MODEM (Modulator/Demodulator): A device that serves as a bridge between your digital
computer and some form of analogue line used to transmit data, such as a phone line
(standard modem) or analogue cable connection (cable modem).
multiplexer (mux): A logic circuit that sends one of several inputs out over a single output
channel.
node: One computer/machine or address on a network. If you managed a network with 10
printers, 50 servers and 150 client machines, you could say you managed a network with 210
nodes.
online: This term refers to anything that is on the Internet and electronically transmitted.
477
optical fibre: Provides high quality transmission at very high speeds.
packet: A collection of information. The term is most often used to refer to the chunks of
information sent over computer networks.
peripheral: Any device that is not part of the motherboard, aside from memory and the CPU.
For example, video cards, sound cards, modems and hard drives are peripherals.
point-to-point protocol (PPP): The mode of transport used to connect a computer to the
Internet via a dial-up adapter (a modem).
protocol: A general behaviour that computers and network devices must follow to understand
one another.
real-time: Tasks that are time-critical and must happen in our time (as opposed to the much
faster computer). The user interface should always be real-time. If you move the mouse, your
pointer should move on screen immediately. Unfortunately, Windows can bog down enough,
so that this does not happen.
ring topology: A network that is connected on both ends to one source, with client machines
hanging off of the ring. If you break the ring, all computers in the ring lose connectivity.
RTGS: Real time gross settlement system. Instant credit through the RBI clearing system.
safe mode: An operating mode used in Microsoft operating systems. It was introduced in
Windows 95 first and was loaded automatically, if Windows 95 crashed during the boot up.
You can access Safe Mode if you press the "F8" key when new Windows operating systems
are booting—this will bring you to a menu that allows you to boot into safe mode. Safe Mode
boots the operating system with minimal driver support. The purpose of it is to help resolve
boot problems.
server: A machine whose sole purpose is to supply data so that other machines can use that
data.
simplex transmission: It transmits data in one direction only.
smart card: A plastic card with an Integrated chip installed.
standalone: A hardware device or piece of software that works with nothing else required.
star topology: A network topology that has network hubs at the centre, with all connected
computers linked back to the hub by a single cable. Thus, if one cable goes down, the rest of
the computers can still communicate.
SWIFT: Society for worldwide inter-bank financial telecommunication is an instant transfer
of messages internationally.
token ring: A network topology pioneered by IBM and eventually made into the IEEE 802.5
standard. Token ring networks are wired, in a ring topology and nodes on the network pass a
token around. Whichever node has the token is allowed to use the network.
usenet newsgroups: Also referred to simply as "newsgroups," Usenet newsgroups are a huge
bunch of Internet discussion groups that replicate across the Internet every so often.
vein recognition: Uses unique vein structure of the human body to identify individuals.
visual recognition: Digitising a picture of a person, storing in a smart card then using it for
identification.
voice recognition system: It compares voices with original recorded.
VSAT: An outdoor small dish antenna interfacing with a satellite.
WAN (Wide Area Network): Any network that spans more than one location. Typically at
least one of the locations is fairly remote.
478
WAP (Wireless Application Protocol): A proposed standard that allows for transfer of data
securely between wireless devices, such as, PDAs, cellphones, pagers or other combinations
of those devices. WAP supports many different wireless networks.
world wide web (WWW or Web): This is basically a means of communicating text, graphics
and other multimedia objects over the Internet.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Agarwal O.P., Practice & Law of Banking CAIIB — Guide, Skylark Publications, New
Delhi.
, Practice & Law of Banking CAIIB - Guide, Skylark Publications, New Delhi.
Baker, Michael J., Marketing -An Introductory Text, The Macmillan Press Ltd., 1974.
Berry, Leonard L., Donnelly, Jr., James H., Marketing for Bankers, American Institute of
Banking, American Bankers Association, 1975.
Black, D. Uyless, Data Communication and Distributed Networks, Prentice-Hall, 1995.
Chacko, Oommen, Grewal, Rajendra, Pai, Satish, Marketing of Banking Services (For CAIIB
Examination), The Indian Institute of Bankers, 2003.
Chatterjee Arun, Credit Management, Skylark Publications, New Delhi.
, Securitization Reconstruction and Enforcement of Secured Debts, Skylark
Publications, New Delhi.
Ghosh Roy D., Bank Marketing -A Handbook for Branch Managers, B.D.P. Publishers.
IIBF, Introduction to Computer, Indian Institute of Banking & Finance and Macmillan, New
Delhi, 2003.
Iyer, T. N. Ananthram, E. Venkateshvara Rao and M. Sitarama Murthy, Computerisation in
Banking Industry in India, Indian Bank, 1991.
Jain, Alok K., Marketing Challenges for Commercial Banks of India, Swajay Publishers,
1997.
Jha, S. M., Bank Marketing. Himalaya Publishing House, 2000.
Kaptan, S.S. and Choubey, N.S., Indian Banking in Electronic Era, Sarup & Sons, New
Delhi, 2003.
Kotler, Philip, Marketing Management, Pearson Education (Singapore) Pvt. Ltd., 2003.
Kotler, Philip, Armstrong, Gary, Principles of Marketing, Pearson Education (Singapore) Pvt.
Ltd., 2004.
Madhukar R.K., Dynamics of Bank Marketing, Sri Sudhindra Publishing House, 1990.
Maheshwari, S.N., Management Accounting and Financial Management, S. Chand & Sons,
New Delhi.
, Management Accounting and Financial Management, S. Chand & Sons, New Delhi.
Majumdar, Ramanuj, Product Management in India, Prentice-Hall of India Pvt. Ltd., 2004.
Louis W. Stern and Adell EI-Ansary, Marketing Channels.
Meidan, Arthur, Bank Marketing Management, Macmillan Publishers Ltd., 1984.
Mukherjee D.D., Credit Appraisal Risk Analysis and Decision Making, Snow White
Publications P. Ltd., Mumbai.
Patodiya S.N., Practical Problems on Banking, Amit Publication, Jaipur.
Payne, Adrian, The Essence of Services Marketing, Prentice-Hall of India Pvt. Ltd., 1995.
Pezzullo, Mary Ann, Marketing Financial Services, American Bankers Association, The
Indian Institute of Bankers, 1999.
Ramaswamy VS., Namakumari S., Marketing Management - Planning, Implementation &
Control, Macmillan India Ltd., 2004.
Rindani H.G., Ramesh L.G., Bharucha, Sylloo, Khanolkar S.D., Business Communication
and Customer Relations, The Indian Institute of Bankers, 2003.
Schaan, Louis Jean and Kelly, Michael J. ed., Cases in Alliance Management, Sage
(www.sagepublications.com)
480
Schewe, Charles D., Hiam, Alexander Watson, The Portable MBA in Marketing, John Wiley
& Sons, Inc., 2nd Edition.
Sobti, Renu, Banking and Financial Services in India - Marketing Redefined. New Century
Publications, 2003.
Soni, S. and V. Aggarwal, Computers and Banking, Sultan Chand & Sons, New Delhi.
Srinivasan, R., Services Marketing - The Indian Context, Prentice- Hall of India Pvt. Ltd.,
2004.
Tanenbaum, S., Computer Networks, Prentice-Hall, 1996.
Technical Literature on VSAT Technology.
Verma, J.C., Negotiable Instruments Act, Bharat Law House Private Ltd., New Delhi.
Vishwanathan R., Industrial Finance, S. Chand & Co. Ltd., New Delhi.
